Early Adopter's Guide to FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE

The FreeBSD Release Engineering Team

Copyright Â© 2002 by The FreeBSD Release Engineering Team

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/early-adopter/article.sgml,v
1.5 2002/11/03 22:06:48 ceri Exp $

<<<<<<< HEAD

=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1 Introduction

FreeBSD 5.0 marks the first new major version of FreeBSD in over two
years. Besides a number of new features, it also contains a number of
major developments in the underlying system architecture. Along with
these advances, however, comes a system that incorporates a tremendous
amount of new and not-widely-tested code. Compared to the existing line
of 4.X releases, 5.0 may have regressions in areas of stability,
performance, and occasionally functionality.

For these reasons, the Release Engineering Team <re@FreeBSD.org> does
not encourage users to blindly update from older FreeBSD releases to
5.0. Specifically, for more conservative users, we recommend running 4.X
releases (such as 4.7-RELEASE or the upcoming 4.8-RELEASE) for the
near-term future. We feel that such users are probably best served by
upgrading to 5.X only after a 5-STABLE development branch has been
created; this may be around the time of 5.1-RELEASE or 5.2-RELEASE.

(FreeBSD 5.0 suffers from what has been described as a ``chicken and
egg'' problem. The entire project has a goal of producing a 5.0-RELEASE
that is as stable and reliable as possible. This stability and
reliability requires widespread testing, particularly of the system's
newer features. However, getting a large number of users to test the
system, in a practical sense, means building and distributing a release
first!)

This article describes some of the issues involved in installing and
running FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE. We begin with a brief overview of the
FreeBSD release process. We then present some of the more noteworthy new
features in FreeBSD 5.0, along with some areas that may prove
troublesome for unwary users. For those users choosing to remain with
4-STABLE-based releases, we give some of the short- to medium-term plans
for this development branch. Finally, we present some notes on upgrading
existing 4.X systems to 5.0.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2 An Overview of the FreeBSD Release Process

FreeBSD employs a model of development that relies on multiple
development branches within the source code repository. The main branch
is called ``CURRENT'', and is referred to in the CVS repository with the
HEAD tag. New features are committed first to this branch; although this
means that CURRENT is the first to see new functionality, it also means
that it occasionally suffers from breakages as new features are added
and debugged.

Most FreeBSD releases are made from one of several ``STABLE'' branches.
Features are only added to these branches after some amount of testing
in CURRENT. At the moment, only one STABLE branch is under active
development; this branch is referred to as ``4-STABLE'', and all of the
FreeBSD 4.X releases were based on it. This branch has the tag RELENG_4
in the CVS repository.

FreeBSD 5.0 will be based on the CURRENT branch. This will be the first
release from this branch in over two years (the last was FreeBSD 4.0, in
March 2000).

At some point after the release of FreeBSD 5.0, a ``5-STABLE'' branch
will be created in the FreeBSD CVS repository with the branch tag
RELENG_5. The past two stable branches (3-STABLE and 4-STABLE) were
created immediately after their respective ``dot-oh'' releases (3.0 and
4.0, respectively). In hindsight, this practice did not give sufficient
time for either CURRENT or the new STABLE branches to stabilize after
the new branches were created.

Therefore, the release engineering team will only create the 5-STABLE
branch in the CVS repository after they have found a relatively stable
state to use as its basis. It is likely that there will be multiple
releases in the 5.X series before this happens; we estimate that the
5-STABLE branch will be created sometime after 5.1-RELEASE or
5.2-RELEASE.

More information on FreeBSD release engineering processes can be found
on the Release Engineering Web pages and in the FreeBSD Release
Engineering article.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3 New Features

A large attraction of FreeBSD 5.0 is a number of new features. These new
features and functionality generally involve large architectural changes
that were not feasible to port back to the FreeBSD 4-STABLE development
branch. (By contrast, many self-contained enhancements, such as new
device drivers or userland utilities, have already been ported.) A
brief, but not exhaustive list includes:

-   SMPng: The ``next generation'' support for SMP machines (work in
    progress). There is now partial support for multiple processors to
    be running in the kernel at the same time.

-   KSE: Kernel Scheduled Entities allow a single process to have
    multiple kernel-level threads, similar to Scheduler Activations.

-   New architectures: Support for the sparc64 and ia64 architectures,
    in addition to the i386, pc98, and alpha.

-   GCC: The compiler toolchain is now based on GCC 3.X, rather than GCC
    2.95.X.

-   MAC: Support for extensible, loadable Mandatory Access Control
    policies.

-   GEOM: A flexible framework for transformations of disk I/O requests.
    An experimental disk encryption facility has been developed based on
    GEOM.

-   FFS: The FFS filesystem now supports background fsck(8) operations
    (for faster crash recovery) and filesystem snapshots.

-   UFS2: A new UFS2 on-disk format has been added, which supports
    extended per-file attributes and larger file sizes.

-   Cardbus: Support for Cardbus devices.

A more comprehensive list of new features can be found in the release
notes for FreeBSD 5.0.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

4 Drawbacks to Early Adoption

Along with the new features of FreeBSD 5.0 come some areas that can
cause problems, or at least can lead to unexpected behavior. Generally,
these come from the fact that a number of features are
works-in-progress. A partial list of these areas of difficulty includes:

-   A number of features are not yet finished. Examples from the feature
    list above include SMPng and KSE.

-   Because of changes in kernel data structures and ABIs/APIs,
    third-party binary device drivers will require modifications to work
    correctly under FreeBSD 5.0.

-   Several parts of FreeBSD's base system functionality have been moved
    to the Ports Collection. Notable examples include Perl, UUCP, and
    most (but not all) games. While these programs are still supported,
    their removal from the base system may cause some confusion.

-   A number of ports and packages do not build or do not run correctly
    under FreeBSD 5.0, whereas they did under FreeBSD 4-STABLE.
    Generally these problems are caused by compiler toolchain changes or
    cleanups of header files.

-   Because FreeBSD 5.0 is the first release from the CURRENT branch in
    over two years, many of its features are seeing wide exposure for
    the first time. Many of these features (such as SMPng) have broad
    impacts on the kernel.

-   A certain amount of debugging and diagnostic code is still in place
    to help track down problems in FreeBSD 5.0's new features. This may
    cause FreeBSD 5.0 to perform more slowly than 4-STABLE.

-   Features are only added to the 4-STABLE development branch after a
    ``settling time'' in -CURRENT. FreeBSD 5.0 does not have the
    stabilizing influence of a -STABLE branch. (It is likely that the
    5-STABLE development branch will be created sometime after
    5.1-RELEASE or 5.2-RELEASE.)

Because a number of these drawbacks affect system stability, the release
engineering team recommends that more conservative sites and users stick
to releases based on the 4-STABLE branch until the 5.X series is more
polished.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

5 Plans for the 4-STABLE Branch

The release of FreeBSD 5.0 does not mean the end of the 4-STABLE branch.
There will be at least one more release on this branch, namely
4.8-RELEASE, currently scheduled for 1 February 2003.

As of this writing, the release engineering team has no definite plans
for future releases (past 4.8) on the 4-STABLE branch. However, a
4.9-RELEASE or even a 4.10-RELEASE are likely possibilities. Any future
releases from this branch will depend on several factors. The most
important of these is the existence and stability of the 5-STABLE
branch. If CURRENT is not sufficiently stable to allow the creation of a
5-STABLE branch, this may require and permit more releases from the
4-STABLE branch. Until the last declared release on the 4-STABLE branch,
new features may be merged from HEAD at the discretion of developers,
subject to existing release engineering policies.

To some extent, the release engineering team will take into account user
demand for future 4-STABLE releases. This demand, however, will need to
be balanced with release engineering resources (in terms of personnel,
computing resources, and mirror archive space).

The Security Officer Team <security-officer@FreeBSD.org> will continue
to support releases made from the 4-STABLE branch in accordance with
their published policies, which can be found on the Security page on the
FreeBSD web site. Generally, the two most recent releases from any
branch will be supported with respect to security advisories and
security fixes. At its discretion, the team may support other releases.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

6 Notes on Upgrading

For those users with existing FreeBSD systems, this section offers a few
notes on upgrading a FreeBSD 4.X system to 5.X. As with any FreeBSD
upgrade, it is crucial to read the release notes and the errata for the
version in question, as well as src/UPDATING for source upgrades.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

6.1 Binary Upgrades

Probably the most straightforward approach is that of ``backup
everything, reformat, reinstall, and restore everything''. This
eliminates problems of incompatible or obsolete executables or
configuration files polluting the new system.

As of this time, the binary upgrade option in sysinstall(8) has not been
well-tested for cross-major-version upgrades. Using this feature is not
recommended.

On the i386 and pc98 platforms, a UserConfig utility exists on 4-STABLE
to allow boot-time configuration of ISA devices when booting from
installation media. Under FreeBSD 5.0, this functionality has been
replaced in part by the device.hints(5) mechanism (it allows specifying
the same parameters, but is not interactive).

Floppy-based binary installations may require downloading a third, new
floppy image holding additional device drivers in kernel modules. This
drivers.flp floppy image will generally be found in the same location as
the usual kern.flp and mfsroot.flp floppy images.

CDROM-based installations on the i386 architecture now use a
``no-emulation'' boot loader. This allows, among other things, the use
of a GENERIC kernel, rather than the stripped-down kernel on the floppy
images. In theory, any system capable of booting the Microsoft Windows
NT 4 installation CDROMs should be able to cope with the FreeBSD 5.0
CDROMs.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

6.2 Source Upgrades

Reading src/UPDATING is absolutely essential. The section entitled ``To
upgrade from 4.x-stable to current'' contains a step-by-step update
procedure. This procedure must be followed exactly, without making use
of the ``shortcuts'' that some users occasionally employ.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

6.3 Common Notes

Perl has been removed from the base system. The recommended way of
installing Perl is either from a pre-built package or from the Ports
Collection. Building Perl as a part of the base system created a number
of difficulties which made updates problematic. The base system
utilities that used Perl have either been rewritten (if still
applicable) or discarded (if obsolete).

It is generally possible to run old 4.X executables under 5.X, but this
requires the compat4x distribution to be installed. Thus, using old
ports may be possible.

When installing or upgrading over the top of an existing 4-STABLE-based
system, it is extremely important to clear out old header files in
/usr/include. Renaming or moving this directory before a binary
installation or an installworld is generally sufficient. If this step is
not taken, confusion may result (especially with C++ programs) as the
compiler may wind up using a mixture of obsolete and current header
files.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

7 Summary

While FreeBSD 5.0 contains a number of new and exciting features, it may
not be suitable for all users at this time. In this document, we
presented some background on release engineering, some of the more
notable new features of the 5.0 series, and some drawbacks to early
adoption. We also presented some future plans for the 4-STABLE
development branch and some tips on upgrading for early adopters.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT should subscribe to the
<current@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.
