FreeBSD 5.0-DP2 Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v 1.9
2002/03/14 21:52:01 bmah Exp $

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

  This document lists known issues for FreeBSD 5.0-DP2. This information
  includes information relating to the software or documentation that
  could affect its operation or usability. Also included is a list of
  areas of the base system that could benefit from some extra testing.

  Please note that FreeBSD 5.0-DP2 is not an officially supported
  release of FreeBSD. Unlike supported releases, this errata file will
  not be updated. Testers of FreeBSD 5.0-DP2 should subscribe to the
  FreeBSD-CURRENT mailing list <freebsd-current@FreeBSD.org> to stay
  informed about late-breaking issues and developments.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1 Introduction

This errata document lists known problems relating to FreeBSD 5.0-DP2.
Before installing this version, it is important to consult this document
to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems that may already
have been found and fixed.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2 Known Problems

This section describes some known issues and problems with FreeBSD
5.0-DP2. The Release Engineering Team <re@FreeBSD.org> intends to
address these problems in some manner before FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE. All
users of FreeBSD 5.0-DP2 should be subscribed to the FreeBSD-CURRENT
mailing list <freebsd-current@FreeBSD.org> to remain informed about
developments regarding these and other issues.

Packages in FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE will be compressed using bzip2(1). In
some cases, pkg_add(1) has some difficulties working with packages
compressed using gzip(1) (typical cases are from within sysinstall(8),
and when using the -r flag). This does not affect the default package
sets provided with snapshots.

The NWFS feature is broken.

Various documents may not reflect differences between the line of
FreeBSD 4-STABLE releases and FreeBSD 5.0-DP2. In addition, the
architecture-specific files in the release documentation are likely
incomplete for new architectures (sparc64 and ia64).

Installations from boot floppies are no longer supported on the alpha
platform. The combination of the boot loader and a (highly
stripped-down) kernel is too large to fit on a 1.44 MB floppy disk. Some
work in this area is ongoing; this feature may return before FreeBSD
5.0-RELEASE.

The __sF symbol in libc has been made static, as part of work to make
FILE expandable. Applications built on FreeBSD 4-STABLE-based systems on
on FreeBSD -CURRENT systems before 13 August 2001 may need to be
recompiled. Due to previously unforseen compatability problems, this
change may be reverted prior to 5.0-RELEASE and postponed for another
release or two.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT should subscribe to the
<current@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.
