FreeBSD/i386 5.0-DP2 Installation Instructions

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright Â© 2000, 2001, 2002 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

  This article gives some brief instructions on installing FreeBSD/i386
  5.0-DP2, with particular emphasis given to obtaining a FreeBSD
  distribution. Some notes on troubleshooting and frequently-asked
  questions are also given.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1 Installing FreeBSD

This section documents the process of installing a new distribution of
FreeBSD. These instructions pay particular emphasis to the process of
obtaining the FreeBSD 5.0-DP2 distribution and to beginning the
installation procedure. The ``Installing FreeBSD'' chapter of the
FreeBSD Handbook provides more in-depth information about the
installation program itself, including a guided walkthrough with
screenshots.

If you are upgrading from a previous release of FreeBSD, please see
Section 3 for instructions on upgrading.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.1 Getting Started

Probably the most important pre-installation step that can be taken is
that of reading the various instruction documents provided with FreeBSD.
A roadmap of documents pertaining to this release of FreeBSD can be
found in README.TXT, which can usually be found in the same location as
this file; most of these documents, such as the release notes and the
hardware compatibility list, are also accessible in the Documentation
menu of the installer.

Note that on-line versions of the FreeBSD FAQ and Handbook are also
available from the FreeBSD Project Web site, if you have an Internet
connection.

This collection of documents may seem daunting, but the time spent
reading them will likely be saved many times over. Being familiar with
what resources are available can also be helpful in the event of
problems during installation.

The best laid plans sometimes go awry, so if you run into trouble take a
look at Section 4, which contains valuable troubleshooting information.
You should also read an updated copy of ERRATA.TXT before installing,
since this will alert you to any problems which have reported in the
interim for your particular release.

  Important: While FreeBSD does its best to safeguard against accidental
  loss of data, it's still more than possible to wipe out your entire
  disk with this installation if you make a mistake. Please do not
  proceed to the final FreeBSD installation menu unless you've
  adequately backed up any important data first.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.2 Hardware Requirements

FreeBSD for the IA-32 requires a 386 or better processor to run (sorry,
there is no support for 286 processors) and at least 5 megs of RAM to
install and 4 megs of RAM to run. You will need at least 100MB of free
hard drive space for the most minimal installation. See below for ways
of shrinking existing DOS partitions in order to install FreeBSD.

If you are not familiar with configuring hardware for FreeBSD, you
should be sure to read the HARDWARE.TXT file; it contains important
information on what hardware is supported by FreeBSD.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.3 Floppy Disk Image Instructions

Depending on how you choose to install FreeBSD, you may need to create a
set of floppy disks (usually two) to begin the installation process.
This section briefly describes how to create these disks, either from a
CDROM installation or from the Internet. Note that in the common case of
installing FreeBSD from CDROM, on a machine that supports bootable
CDROMs, the steps outlined in this section will not be needed and can be
skipped.

For a normal CDROM or network installation, all you need to copy onto
actual floppies from the floppies/ directory are the kern.flp and
mfsroot.flp images (for 1.44MB floppies).

Getting these images over the network is easy. Simply fetch the
release/floppies/kern.flp and release/floppies/mfsroot.flp files from
http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/ or one of the many mirrors listed at
FTP Sites section of the Handbook, or on the
http://mirrorlist.FreeBSD.org/ Web pages.

Get two blank, freshly formatted floppies and image copy kern.flp onto
one and mfsroot.flp onto the other. These images are not DOS files. You
cannot simply copy them to a DOS or UFS floppy as regular files, you
need to ``image'' copy them to the floppy with fdimage.exe under DOS
(see the tools directory on your CDROM or FreeBSD FTP mirror) or the
dd(1) command in UNIX.

For example, to create the kernel floppy image from DOS, you'd do
something like this:

        C> fdimage kern.flp a:

Assuming that you'd copied fdimage.exe and kern.flp into a directory
somewhere. You would do the same for mfsroot.flp, of course.

If you're creating the boot floppy from a UNIX machine, you may find
that:

        # dd if=floppies/kern.flp of=/dev/rfd0

or

        # dd if=floppies/kern.flp of=/dev/floppy

work well, depending on your hardware and operating system environment
(different versions of UNIX have different names for the floppy drive).

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.4 Installing FreeBSD from CDROM or the Internet

The easiest type of installation is from CDROM. If you have a supported
CDROM drive and a FreeBSD installation CDROM, there are 2 ways of
starting the installation from it:

-   If your system supports bootable CDROM media (usually an option
    which can be selectively enabled in the controller's setup menu or
    in the PC BIOS for some systems) and you have it enabled, FreeBSD
    supports the ``El Torito'' bootable CD standard. Simply put the
    installation CD in your CDROM drive and boot the system to begin
    installation.

-   Build a set of FreeBSD boot floppies from the floppies/ directory in
    every FreeBSD distribution. Either simply use the makeflp.bat script
    from DOS or read Section 1.3 for more information on creating the
    bootable floppies under different operating systems. Then you simply
    boot from the first floppy and you should soon be in the FreeBSD
    installation.

If you don't have a CDROM (or your computer does not support booting
from CDROM) and would like to simply install over the net using PPP,
SLIP or a dedicated connection. You should start the installation by
building a set of FreeBSD boot floppies from the files floppies/kern.flp
and floppies/mfsroot.flp using the instructions found in Section 1.3.
Restart your computer using the kern.flp disk; when prompted, insert the
mfsroot.flp disk. Then, please go to Section 1.5.5 for additional tips
on installing via FTP or NFS.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.5 Detail on various installation types

Once you've gotten yourself to the initial installation screen somehow,
you should be able to follow the various menu prompts and go from there.
If you've never used the FreeBSD installation before, you are also
encouraged to read some of the documentation in the Documentation
submenu as well as the general ``Usage'' instructions on the first menu.

  Note: If you get stuck at a screen, press the F1 key for online
  documentation relevant to that specific section.

If you've never installed FreeBSD before, or even if you have, the
``Standard'' installation mode is the most recommended since it makes
sure that you'll visit all the various important checklist items along
the way. If you're much more comfortable with the FreeBSD installation
process and know exactly what you want to do, use the ``Express'' or
``Custom'' installation options. If you're upgrading an existing system,
use the ``Upgrade'' option.

The FreeBSD installer supports the direct use of floppy, DOS, tape,
CDROM, FTP, NFS and UFS partitions as installation media; further tips
on installing from each type of media are listed below.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.5.1 Installing from a Network CDROM

If you simply wish to install from a local CDROM drive then see Section
1.4. If you don't have a CDROM drive on your system and wish to use a
FreeBSD distribution CD in the CDROM drive of another system to which
you have network connectivity, there are also several ways of going
about it:

-   If you would be able to FTP install FreeBSD directly from the CDROM
    drive in some FreeBSD machine, it's quite easy: You simply add the
    following line to the password file (using the vipw(8) command):

            ftp:*:99:99::0:0:FTP:/cdrom:/sbin/nologin

    On the machine on which you are running the install, go to the
    Options menu and set Release Name to any. You may then choose a
    Media type of FTP and type in ftp://machine after picking ``URL'' in
    the ftp sites menu.

      Warning: This may allow anyone on the local network (or Internet)
      to make ``anonymous FTP'' connections to this machine, which may
      not be desirable.

-   If you would rather use NFS to export the CDROM directly to the
    machine(s) you'll be installing from, you need to first add an entry
    to the /etc/exports file (on the machine with the CDROM drive). The
    example below allows the machine ziggy.foo.com to mount the CDROM
    directly via NFS during installation:

            /cdrom          -ro             ziggy.foo.com

    The machine with the CDROM must also be configured as an NFS server,
    of course, and if you're not sure how to do that then an NFS
    installation is probably not the best choice for you unless you're
    willing to read up on rc.conf(5) and configure things appropriately.
    Assuming that this part goes smoothly, you should be able to enter:
    cdrom-host:/cdrom as the path for an NFS installation when the
    target machine is installed, e.g. wiggy:/cdrom.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.5.2 Installing from Floppies

If you must install from floppy disks, either due to unsupported
hardware or just because you enjoy doing things the hard way, you must
first prepare some floppies for the install.

First, make your boot floppies as described in Section 1.3.

Second, peruse Section 2 and pay special attention to the ``Distribution
Format'' section since it describes which files you're going to need to
put onto floppy and which you can safely skip.

Next you will need, at minimum, as many 1.44MB floppies as it takes to
hold all files in the bin (binary distribution) directory. If you're
preparing these floppies under DOS, then these floppies must be
formatted using the MS-DOS FORMAT command. If you're using Windows, use
the Windows File Manager format command.

  Important: Frequently, floppy disks come ``factory preformatted''.
  While convenient, many problems reported by users in the past have
  resulted from the use of improperly formatted media. Re-format them
  yourself, just to make sure.

If you're creating the floppies from another FreeBSD machine, a format
is still not a bad idea though you don't need to put a DOS filesystem on
each floppy. You can use the disklabel(8) and newfs(8) commands to put a
UFS filesystem on a floppy, as the following sequence of commands
illustrates:

        # fdformat -f 1440 fd0.1440
        # disklabel -w -r fd0.1440 floppy3
        # newfs -t 2 -u 18 -l 1 -i 65536 /dev/fd0

After you've formatted the floppies for DOS or UFS, you'll need to copy
the files onto them. The distribution files are split into chunks
conveniently sized so that 5 of them will fit on a conventional 1.44MB
floppy. Go through all your floppies, packing as many files as will fit
on each one, until you've got all the distributions you want packed up
in this fashion. Each distribution should go into its own subdirectory
on the floppy, e.g.: a:\bin\bin.inf, a:\bin\bin.aa, a:\bin\bin.ab, ...

  Important: The bin.inf file also needs to go on the first floppy of
  the bin set since it is read by the installation program in order to
  figure out how many additional pieces to look for when fetching and
  concatenating the distribution. When putting distributions onto
  floppies, the distname.inf file must occupy the first floppy of each
  distribution set. This is also covered in README.TXT.

Once you come to the Media screen of the install, select ``Floppy'' and
you'll be prompted for the rest.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.5.3 Installing from a DOS partition

To prepare for installation from an MS-DOS partition you should simply
copy the files from the distribution into a directory called FREEBSD on
the Primary DOS partition (C:). For example, to do a minimal
installation of FreeBSD from DOS using files copied from the CDROM, you
might do something like this:

        C:\> MD C:\FREEBSD
        C:\> XCOPY /S E:\BIN C:\FREEBSD\BIN

Assuming that E: was where your CD was mounted.

For as many distributions as you wish to install from DOS (and you have
free space for), install each one in a directory under C:\FREEBSD - the
BIN dist is only the minimal requirement.

Once you've copied the directories, you can simply launch the
installation from floppies as normal and select ``DOS'' as your media
type when the time comes.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.5.4 Installing from QIC/SCSI Tape

When installing from tape, the installation program expects the files to
be simply tar'ed onto it, so after fetching all of the files for the
distributions you're interested in, simply use tar(1) to get them onto
the tape with a command something like this:

        # cd /where/you/have/your/dists
        # tar cvf /dev/rsa0 dist1 .. dist2

When you go to do the installation, you should also make sure that you
leave enough room in some temporary directory (which you'll be allowed
to choose) to accommodate the full contents of the tape you've created.
Due to the non-random access nature of tapes, this method of
installation requires quite a bit of temporary storage. You should
expect to require as much temporary storage as you have stuff written on
tape.

  Note: When going to do the installation, the tape must be in the drive
  before booting from the boot floppies. The installation ``probe'' may
  otherwise fail to find it.

Now create a boot floppy as described in Section 1.3 and proceed with
the installation.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.5.5 Installing over a Network using FTP or NFS

After making the boot floppies as described in the first section, you
can load the rest of the installation over a network using one of 3
types of connections: serial port, parallel port, or Ethernet.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.5.5.1 Serial Port

SLIP support is rather primitive, and is limited primarily to hard-wired
links, such as a serial cable running between two computers. The link
must be hard-wired because the SLIP installation doesn't currently offer
a dialing capability. If you need to dial out with a modem or otherwise
dialog with the link before connecting to it, then I recommend that the
PPP utility be used instead.

If you're using PPP, make sure that you have your Internet Service
Provider's IP address and DNS information handy as you'll need to know
it fairly early in the installation process. You may also need to know
your own IP address, though PPP supports dynamic address negotiation and
may be able to pick up this information directly from your ISP if they
support it.

You will also need to know how to use the various ``AT commands'' for
dialing out with your particular brand of modem as the PPP dialer
provides only a very simple terminal emulator.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.5.5.2 Parallel Port

If a hard-wired connection to another FreeBSD or Linux machine is
available, you might also consider installing over a ``laplink'' style
parallel port cable. The data rate over the parallel port is much higher
than what is typically possible over a serial line (up to 50k/sec), thus
resulting in a quicker installation. It's not typically necessary to use
``real'' IP addresses when using a point-to-point parallel cable in this
way and you can generally just use RFC 1918 style addresses for the ends
of the link (e.g. 10.0.0.1, 10.0.0.2, etc).

  Important: If you use a Linux machine rather than a FreeBSD machine as
  your PLIP peer, you will also have to specify link0 in the TCP/IP
  setup screen's ``extra options for ifconfig'' field in order to be
  compatible with Linux's slightly different PLIP protocol.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.5.5.3 Ethernet

FreeBSD supports many common Ethernet cards; a table of supported cards
is provided as part of the FreeBSD Hardware Notes (see HARDWARE.TXT in
the Documentation menu on the boot floppy or the top level directory of
the CDROM). If you are using one of the supported PCMCIA Ethernet cards,
also be sure that it's plugged in before the laptop is powered on.
FreeBSD does not, unfortunately, currently support ``hot insertion'' of
PCMCIA cards during installation.

You will also need to know your IP address on the network, the netmask
value for your subnet and the name of your machine. Your system
administrator can tell you which values are appropriate to your
particular network setup. If you will be referring to other hosts by
name rather than IP address, you'll also need a name server and possibly
the address of a gateway (if you're using PPP, it's your provider's IP
address) to use in talking to it. If you want to install by FTP via an
HTTP proxy (see below), you will also need the proxy's address.

If you do not know the answers to these questions then you should really
probably talk to your system administrator first before trying this type
of installation. Using a randomly chosen IP address or netmask on a live
network is almost guaranteed not to work, and will probably result in a
lecture from said system administrator.

Once you have a network connection of some sort working, the
installation can continue over NFS or FTP.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.5.5.4 NFS installation tips

NFS installation is fairly straight-forward: Simply copy the FreeBSD
distribution files you want onto a server somewhere and then point the
NFS media selection at it.

If this server supports only ``privileged port'' access (this is
generally the default for Sun and Linux workstations), you will need to
set this option in the Options menu before installation can proceed.

If you have a poor quality Ethernet card which suffers from very slow
transfer rates, you may also wish to toggle the appropriate Options
flag.

In order for NFS installation to work, the server must also support
``subdir mounts'', e.g. if your FreeBSD distribution directory lives on
wiggy:/usr/archive/stuff/FreeBSD, then wiggy will have to allow the
direct mounting of /usr/archive/stuff/FreeBSD, not just /usr or
/usr/archive/stuff.

In FreeBSD's /etc/exports file this is controlled by the -alldirs
option. Other NFS servers may have different conventions. If you are
getting Permission Denied messages from the server then it's likely that
you don't have this properly enabled.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.5.5.5 FTP Installation tips

FTP installation may be done from any mirror site containing a
reasonably up-to-date version of FreeBSD. A full menu of reasonable
choices for almost any location in the world is provided in the FTP site
menu during installation.

If you are installing from some other FTP site not listed in this menu,
or you are having troubles getting your name server configured properly,
you can also specify your own URL by selecting the ``URL'' choice in
that menu. A URL can contain a hostname or an IP address, so something
like the following would work in the absence of a name server:

        ftp://216.66.64.162/pub/FreeBSD/releases/i386/4.2-RELEASE

There are three FTP installation modes you can use:

-   FTP: This method uses the standard ``Active'' mode for transfers, in
    which the server initiates a connection to the client. This will not
    work through most firewalls but will often work best with older FTP
    servers that do not support passive mode. If your connection hangs
    with passive mode, try this one.

-   FTP Passive: This sets the FTP "Passive" mode which prevents the
    server from opening connections to the client. This option is best
    for users to pass through firewalls that do not allow incoming
    connections on random port addresses.

-   FTP via an HTTP proxy: This option instructs FreeBSD to use HTTP to
    connect to a proxy for all FTP operations. The proxy will translate
    the requests and send them to the FTP server. This allows the user
    to pass through firewalls that do not allow FTP at all, but offer an
    HTTP proxy. You must specify the hostname of the proxy in addition
    to the FTP server.

    In the rare case that you have an FTP proxy that does not go through
    HTTP, you can specify the URL as something like:

            ftp://foo.bar.com:port/pub/FreeBSD

    In the URL above, port is the port number of the proxy FTP server.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.5.6 Tips for Serial Console Users

If you'd like to install FreeBSD on a machine using just a serial port
(e.g. you don't have or wish to use a VGA card), please follow these
steps:

1.  Connect some sort of ANSI (vt100) compatible terminal or terminal
    emulation program to the COM1 port of the PC you are installing
    FreeBSD onto.

2.  Unplug the keyboard (yes, that's correct!) and then try to boot from
    floppy or the installation CDROM, depending on the type of
    installation media you have, with the keyboard unplugged.

3.  If you don't get any output on your serial console, plug the
    keyboard in again and wait for some beeps. If you are booting from
    the CDROM, proceed to step 5 as soon as you hear the beep.

4.  For a floppy boot, the first beep means to remove the kern.flp
    floppy and insert the mfsroot.flp floppy, after which you should
    press Enter and wait for another beep.

5.  

    Hit the space bar, then enter

            boot -h

    and you should now definitely be seeing everything on the serial
    port. If that still doesn't work, check your serial cabling as well
    as the settings on your terminal emulation program or actual
    terminal device. It should be set for 9600 baud, 8 bits, no parity.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1.6 Question and Answer Section for IA-32 Architecture Users

1.6.1. Help! I have no space! Do I need to delete everything first?

1.6.2. Can I use compressed DOS filesystems from FreeBSD?

1.6.3. Can I mount my DOS extended partitions?

1.6.4. Can I run DOS binaries under FreeBSD?

1.6.1. Help! I have no space! Do I need to delete everything first?

If your machine is already running DOS and has little or no free space
available for FreeBSD's installation, all is not lost! You may find the
FIPS utility, provided in the tools/ subdirectory on the FreeBSD CDROM
or on the various FreeBSD ftp sites, to be quite useful.

FIPS allows you to split an existing DOS partition into two pieces,
preserving the original partition and allowing you to install onto the
second free piece. You first ``defrag'' your DOS partition, using the
DOS 6.xx DEFRAG utility or the Norton Disk Tools, then run FIPS. It will
prompt you for the rest of the information it needs. Afterwards, you can
reboot and install FreeBSD on the new partition. Also note that FIPS
will create the second partition as a ``clone'' of the first, so you'll
actually see that you now have two DOS Primary partitions where you
formerly had one. Don't be alarmed! You can simply delete the extra DOS
Primary partition (making sure it's the right one by examining its
size).

FIPS does NOT currently work with NTFS style partitions. To split up
such a partition, you will need a commercial product such as Partition
Magic. Sorry, but this is just the breaks if you've got a Windows
partition hogging your whole disk and you don't want to reinstall from
scratch.

1.6.2. Can I use compressed DOS filesystems from FreeBSD?

No. If you are using a utility such as Stacker(tm) or DoubleSpace(tm),
FreeBSD will only be able to use whatever portion of the filesystem you
leave uncompressed. The rest of the filesystem will show up as one large
file (the stacked/dblspaced file!). Do not remove that file as you will
probably regret it greatly!

It is probably better to create another uncompressed DOS extended
partition and use this for communications between DOS and FreeBSD if
such is your desire.

1.6.3. Can I mount my DOS extended partitions?

Yes. DOS extended partitions are mapped in at the end of the other
``slices'' in FreeBSD, e.g. your D: drive might be /dev/da0s5, your E:
drive /dev/da0s6, and so on. This example assumes, of course, that your
extended partition is on SCSI drive 0. For IDE drives, substitute ad for
da appropriately. You otherwise mount extended partitions exactly like
you would mount any other DOS drive, e.g.:

        # mount -t msdos /dev/da0s5 /dos_d

1.6.4. Can I run DOS binaries under FreeBSD?

Ongoing work with BSDI's doscmd(1) utility will suffice in many cases,
though it still has some rough edges. If you're interested in working on
this, please send mail to the FreeBSD-emulation mailing list
<freebsd-emulation@FreeBSD.org> and indicate that you're interested in
joining this ongoing effort!

The emulators/pcemu port/package in the FreeBSD Ports Collection which
emulates an 8088 and enough BIOS services to run DOS text mode
applications. It requires the X Window System (XFree86) to operate.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2 Distribution Format

A typical FreeBSD distribution directory looks something like this
(exact details may vary depending on version, architecture, and other
factors):

        ERRATA.HTM      README.TXT      compat1x        dict            kernel
        ERRATA.TXT      RELNOTES.HTM    compat20        doc             manpages
        HARDWARE.HTM    RELNOTES.TXT    compat21        docbook.css     packages
        HARDWARE.TXT    base            compat22        filename.txt    ports
        INSTALL.HTM     boot            compat3x        floppies        proflibs
        INSTALL.TXT     catpages        compat4x        games           src
        README.HTM      cdrom.inf       crypto          info            tools

If you want to do a CDROM, FTP or NFS installation from this
distribution directory, all you need to do is make the 1.44MB boot
floppies from the floppies directory (see Section 1.3 for instructions
on how to do this), boot them and follow the instructions. The rest of
the data needed during the installation will be obtained automatically
based on your selections. If you've never installed FreeBSD before, you
also want to read the entirety of this document (the installation
instructions) file.

If you're trying to do some other type of installation or are merely
curious about how a distribution is organized, what follows is a more
thorough description of some of these items in more detail:

1.  The *.TXT and *.HTM files contain documentation (for example, this
    document is contained in both INSTALL.TXT and INSTALL.HTM) and
    should be read before starting an installation. The *.TXT files are
    plain text, while the *.HTM files are HTML files that can be read by
    almost any Web browser. Some distributions may contain documentation
    in other formats as well, such as PDF or PostScript.

2.  docbook.css is a Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) file used by some Web
    browsers for formatting the HTML documentation.

3.  The base, catpages, crypto, dict, doc, games, info, manpages,
    proflibs, and src directories contain the primary distribution
    components of FreeBSD itself and are split into smaller files for
    easy packing onto floppies (should that be necessary).

4.  The compat1x, compat20, compat21, compat22, compat3x, and compat4x
    directories contain distributions for compatibility with older
    releases and are distributed as single gzip'd tar files - they can
    be installed during release time or later by running their
    install.sh scripts.

5.  The floppies/ subdirectory contains the floppy installation images;
    further information on using them can be found in Section 1.3.

6.  The packages and ports directories contain the FreeBSD Packages and
    Ports Collections. Packages may be installed from the packages
    directory by running the command:

            #/stand/sysinstall configPackages

    Packages can also be installed by feeding individual filenames in
    packages/ to the pkg_add(1) command.

    The Ports Collection may be installed like any other distribution
    and requires about 100MB unpacked. More information on the ports
    collection may be obtained from http://www.FreeBSD.org/ports/ or
    locally from /usr/share/doc/handbook if you've installed the doc
    distribution.

7.  Last of all, the tools directory contains various DOS tools for
    discovering disk geometries, installing boot managers and the like.
    It is purely optional and provided only for user convenience.

A typical distribution directory (for example, the info distribution)
looks like this internally:

        CHECKSUM.MD5    info.ab         info.ad         info.inf        install.sh
        info.aa         info.ac         info.ae         info.mtree

The CHECKSUM.MD5 file contains MD5 signatures for each file, should data
corruption be suspected, and is purely for reference. It is not used by
the actual installation and does not need to be copied with the rest of
the distribution files. The info.a* files are split, gzip'd tar files,
the contents of which can be viewed by doing:

        # cat info.a* | tar tvzf -

During installation, they are automatically concatenated and extracted
by the installation procedure.

The info.inf file is also necessary since it is read by the installation
program in order to figure out how many pieces to look for when fetching
and concatenating the distribution. When putting distributions onto
floppies, the .inf file must occupy the first floppy of each
distribution set!

The info.mtree file is another non-essential file which is provided for
user reference. It contains the MD5 signatures of the unpacked
distribution files and can be later used with the mtree(8) program to
verify the installation permissions and checksums against any possible
modifications to the file. When used with the base distribution, this
can be an excellent way of detecting trojan horse attacks on your
system.

Finally, the install.sh file is for use by those who want to install the
distribution after installation time. To install the info distribution
from CDROM after a system was installed, for example, you'd do:

        # cd /cdrom/info
        # sh install.sh

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3 Upgrading FreeBSD

These instructions describe a procedure for doing a binary upgrade from
an older version of FreeBSD.

  Warning: While the FreeBSD upgrade procedure does its best to
  safeguard against accidental loss of data, it is still more than
  possible to wipe out your entire disk with this installation! Please
  do not accept the final confirmation request unless you have
  adequately backed up any important data files.

  Important: These notes assume that you are using the version of
  sysinstall(8) supplied with the version of FreeBSD to which you intend
  to upgrade. Using a mismatched version of sysinstall(8) is almost
  guaranteed to cause problems and has been known to leave systems in an
  unusable state. The most commonly made mistake in this regard is the
  use of an old copy of sysinstall(8) from an existing installation to
  upgrade to a newer version of FreeBSD. This is not recommended.

  Warning: Binary upgrades to FreeBSD 5.0-DP2 from FreeBSD 4-STABLE are
  not supported at this time. There are some files present in a FreeBSD
  4-STABLE whose presence can be disruptive, but are not removed by a
  binary upgrade. One notable example is that an old /usr/include/g++
  directory will cause C++ programs to compile incorrectly (or not at
  all).

  These upgrade instructions are provided for the use of users upgrading
  from relatively recent FreeBSD 5-CURRENT snapshots.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.1 Introduction

The upgrade procedure replaces distributions selected by the user with
those corresponding to the new FreeBSD release. It preserves standard
system configuration data, as well as user data, installed packages and
other software.

Administrators contemplating an upgrade are encouraged to study this
section in its entirety before commencing an upgrade. Failure to do so
may result in a failed upgrade or loss of data.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.1.1 Upgrade Overview

Upgrading of a distribution is performed by extracting the new version
of the component over the top of the previous version. Files belonging
to the old distribution are not deleted.

System configuration is preserved by retaining and restoring the
previous version of the following files:

Xaccel.ini, XF86Config, adduser.conf, aliases, aliases.db, amd.map,
crontab, csh.cshrc, csh.login, csh.logout, cvsupfile, dhclient.conf,
disktab, dm.conf, dumpdates, exports, fbtab, fstab, ftpusers, gettytab,
gnats, group, hosts, hosts.allow, hosts.equiv, hosts.lpd, inetd.conf,
kerberosIV, localtime, login.access, login.conf, mail, mail.rc,
make.conf, manpath.config, master.passwd, modems, motd, namedb,
networks, newsyslog.conf, nsmb.conf, nsswitch.conf, pam.conf, passwd,
periodic, ppp, printcap, profile, pwd.db, rc.conf, rc.conf.local,
rc.firewall, rc.local, remote, resolv.conf, rmt, sendmail.cf,
sendmail.cw, services, shells, skeykeys, spwd.db, ssh, syslog.conf,
ttys, uucp

The versions of these files which correspond to the new version are
moved to /etc/upgrade/. The system administrator may peruse these new
versions and merge components as desired. Note that many of these files
are interdependent, and the best merge procedure is to copy all
site-specific data from the current files into the new.

During the upgrade procedure, the administrator is prompted for a
location into which all files from /etc/ are saved. In the event that
local modifications have been made to other files, they may be
subsequently retrieved from this location.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.2 Procedure

This section details the upgrade procedure. Particular attention is
given to items which substantially differ from a normal installation.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.2.1 Backup

User data and system configuration should be backed up before upgrading.
While the upgrade procedure does its best to prevent accidental
mistakes, it is possible to partially or completely destroy data and
configuration information.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.2.2 Mount Filesystems

The disklabel editor is entered with the nominated disk's filesystem
devices listed. Prior to commencing the upgrade, the administrator
should make a note of the device names and corresponding mountpoints.
These mountpoints should be entered here. Do not set the ``newfs flag''
for any filesystems, as this will cause data loss.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.2.3 Select Distributions

When selecting distributions, there are no constraints on which must be
selected. As a general rule, the base distribution should be selected
for an update, and the man distribution if manpages are already
installed. Other distributions may be selected beyond those originally
installed if the administrator wishes to add additional functionality.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.2.4 After Installation

Once the installation procedure has completed, the administrator is
prompted to examine the new configuration files. At this point, checks
should be made to ensure that the system configuration is valid. In
particular, the /etc/rc.conf and /etc/fstab files should be checked.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.3 Upgrading from Source Code

Those interested in an upgrade method that allows more flexibility and
sophistication should take a look at The Cutting Edge in the FreeBSD
Handbook. This procedure involves rebuilding all of FreeBSD from source
code. It requires reliable network connectivity, extra disk space, and
time, but has advantages for networks and other more complex
installations. This is roughly the same procedure as is used for track
the -STABLE or -CURRENT development branches.

/usr/src/UPDATING contains important information on updating a FreeBSD
system from source code. It lists various issues resulting from changes
in FreeBSD that may affect an upgrade.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

4 Troubleshooting

4.1 Repairing an Existing FreeBSD Installation

FreeBSD features a ``Fixit'' option in the top menu of the boot floppy.
To use it, you will also need either a fixit.flp image floppy, generated
in the same fashion as the boot floppy, or the ``live filesystem''
CDROM; typically the second CDROM in a multi-disc FreeBSD distribution.

To invoke fixit, simply boot the kern.flp floppy, choose the ``Fixit''
item and insert the fixit floppy or CDROM when asked. You will then be
placed into a shell with a wide variety of commands available (in the
/stand and /mnt2/stand directories) for checking, repairing and
examining filesystems and their contents. Some UNIX administration
experience is required to use the fixit option.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

4.2 Common Installation Problems for IA-32 Architecture Users

4.2.1. I go to boot from the hard disk for the first time after
installing FreeBSD, the kernel loads and probes my hardware, but stops
with messages like:

4.2.2. I go to boot from the hard disk for the first time after
installing FreeBSD, but the Boot Manager prompt just prints F? at the
boot menu each time but the boot won't go any further.

4.2.3. The mcd(4) driver keeps thinking that it has found a device and
this stops my Intel EtherExpress card from working.

4.2.4. The system finds my ed(4) network card, but I keep getting device
timeout errors.

4.2.5. I booted the install floppy on my IBM ThinkPad (tm) laptop, and
the keyboard is all messed up.

4.2.6. My system can not find my Intel EtherExpress 16 card.

4.2.7. When installing on an EISA HP Netserver, my on-board AIC-7xxx
SCSI controller isn't detected.

4.2.8. I have a Panasonic AL-N1 or Rios Chandler Pentium machine and I
find that the system hangs before ever getting into the installation
now.

4.2.9. I have this CMD640 IDE controller that is said to be broken.

4.2.10. On a Compaq Aero notebook, I get the message ``No floppy devices
found! Please check ...'' when trying to install from floppy.

4.2.11. When installing on an Dell Poweredge XE, Dell proprietary RAID
controller DSA (Dell SCSI Array) isn't recognized.

4.2.12. I have an IBM EtherJet PCI card, it is detected by the fxp(4)
driver correctly, but the lights on the card don't come on and it
doesn't connect to the network.

4.2.13. When I configure the network during installation on an IBM
Netfinity 3500, the system freezes.

4.2.14. When I install onto a drive managed by a Mylex PCI RAID
controller, the system fails to boot (eg. with a read error message).

4.2.1. I go to boot from the hard disk for the first time after
installing FreeBSD, the kernel loads and probes my hardware, but stops
with messages like:

        changing root device to ad1s1a panic: cannot mount root

What is wrong? What can I do?

What is this bios_drive:interface(unit,partition)kernel_name thing that
is displayed with the boot help?

There is a longstanding problem in the case where the boot disk is not
the first disk in the system. The BIOS uses a different numbering scheme
to FreeBSD, and working out which numbers correspond to which is
difficult to get right.

In the case where the boot disk is not the first disk in the system,
FreeBSD can need some help finding it. There are two common situations
here, and in both of these cases, you need to tell FreeBSD where the
root filesystem is. You do this by specifying the BIOS disk number, the
disk type and the FreeBSD disk number for that type.

The first situation is where you have two IDE disks, each configured as
the master on their respective IDE busses, and wish to boot FreeBSD from
the second disk. The BIOS sees these as disk 0 and disk 1, while FreeBSD
sees them as ad0 and ad2.

FreeBSD is on BIOS disk 1, of type ad and the FreeBSD disk number is 2,
so you would say:

        1:ad(2,a)kernel

Note that if you have a slave on the primary bus, the above is not
necessary (and is effectively wrong).

The second situation involves booting from a SCSI disk when you have one
or more IDE disks in the system. In this case, the FreeBSD disk number
is lower than the BIOS disk number. If you have two IDE disks as well as
the SCSI disk, the SCSI disk is BIOS disk 2, type da and FreeBSD disk
number 0, so you would say:

        2:da(0,a)kernel

To tell FreeBSD that you want to boot from BIOS disk 2, which is the
first SCSI disk in the system. If you only had one IDE disk, you would
use '1:' instead.

Once you have determined the correct values to use, you can put the
command exactly as you would have typed it in the /boot.config file
using a standard text editor. Unless instructed otherwise, FreeBSD will
use the contents of this file as the default response to the boot:
prompt.

4.2.2. I go to boot from the hard disk for the first time after
installing FreeBSD, but the Boot Manager prompt just prints F? at the
boot menu each time but the boot won't go any further.

The hard disk geometry was set incorrectly in the Partition editor when
you installed FreeBSD. Go back into the partition editor and specify the
actual geometry of your hard disk. You must reinstall FreeBSD again from
the beginning with the correct geometry.

If you are failing entirely in figuring out the correct geometry for
your machine, here's a tip: Install a small DOS partition at the
beginning of the disk and install FreeBSD after that. The install
program will see the DOS partition and try to infer the correct geometry
from it, which usually works.

The following tip is no longer recommended, but is left here for
reference:

  If you are setting up a truly dedicated FreeBSD server or workstation
  where you don't care for (future) compatibility with DOS, Linux or
  another operating system, you've also got the option to use the entire
  disk (`A' in the partition editor), selecting the non-standard option
  where FreeBSD occupies the entire disk from the very first to the very
  last sector. This will leave all geometry considerations aside, but is
  somewhat limiting unless you're never going to run anything other than
  FreeBSD on a disk.

4.2.3. The mcd(4) driver keeps thinking that it has found a device and
this stops my Intel EtherExpress card from working.

Use the UserConfig utility (see HARDWARE.TXT) and disable the probing of
the mcd0 and mcd1 devices. Generally speaking, you should only leave the
devices that you will be using enabled in your kernel.

4.2.4. The system finds my ed(4) network card, but I keep getting device
timeout errors.

Your card is probably on a different IRQ from what is specified in the
kernel configuration. The ed driver does not use the `soft'
configuration by default (values entered using EZSETUP in DOS), but it
will use the software configuration if you specify ? in the IRQ field of
your kernel config file.

Either move the jumper on the card to a hard configuration setting
(altering the kernel settings if necessary), or specify the IRQ as -1 in
UserConfig or ? in your kernel config file. This will tell the kernel to
use the soft configuration.

Another possibility is that your card is at IRQ 9, which is shared by
IRQ 2 and frequently a cause of problems (especially when you have a VGA
card using IRQ 2!). You should not use IRQ 2 or 9 if at all possible.

4.2.5. I booted the install floppy on my IBM ThinkPad (tm) laptop, and
the keyboard is all messed up.

Older IBM laptops use a non-standard keyboard controller, so you must
tell the keyboard driver (atkbd0) to go into a special mode which works
on the ThinkPads. Change the atkbd0 'Flags' to 0x4 in UserConfig and it
should work fine. (Look in the Input Menu for 'Keyboard'.)

4.2.6. My system can not find my Intel EtherExpress 16 card.

You must set your Intel EtherExpress 16 card to be memory mapped at
address 0xD0000, and set the amount of mapped memory to 32K using the
Intel supplied softset.exe program.

4.2.7. When installing on an EISA HP Netserver, my on-board AIC-7xxx
SCSI controller isn't detected.

This is a known problem, and will hopefully be fixed in the future. In
order to get your system installed at all, boot with the -c option into
UserConfig, but don't use the pretty visual mode but the plain old CLI
mode. Type:

        eisa 12
        quit

at the prompt. (Instead of `quit', you might also type `visual', and
continue the rest of the configuration session in visual mode.) While
it's recommended to compile a custom kernel, dset now also understands
to save this value.

Refer to the FAQ topic 3.16 for an explanation of the problem, and for
how to continue. Remember that you can find the FAQ on your local system
in /usr/share/doc/FAQ, provided you have installed the `doc'
distribution.

4.2.8. I have a Panasonic AL-N1 or Rios Chandler Pentium machine and I
find that the system hangs before ever getting into the installation
now.

Your machine doesn't like the new i586_copyout and i586_copyin code for
some reason. To disable this, boot the installation boot floppy and when
it comes to the very first menu (the choice to drop into kernel
UserConfig mode or not) choose the command-line interface (``expert
mode'') version and type the following at it:

        flags npx0 1

Then proceed normally to boot. This will be saved into your kernel, so
you only need to do it once.

4.2.9. I have this CMD640 IDE controller that is said to be broken.

FreeBSD does not support this controller.

4.2.10. On a Compaq Aero notebook, I get the message ``No floppy devices
found! Please check ...'' when trying to install from floppy.

With Compaq being always a little different from other systems, they do
not announce their floppy drive in the CMOS RAM of an Aero notebook.
Therefore, the floppy disk driver assumes there is no drive configured.
Go to the UserConfig screen, and set the Flags value of the fdc0 device
to 0x1. This pretends the existence of the first floppy drive (as a 1.44
MB drive) to the driver without asking the CMOS at all.

4.2.11. When installing on an Dell Poweredge XE, Dell proprietary RAID
controller DSA (Dell SCSI Array) isn't recognized.

Configure the DSA to use AHA-1540 emulation using EISA configuration
utility. After that FreeBSD detects the DSA as an Adaptec AHA-1540 SCSI
controller, with irq 11 and port 340. Under emulation mode system will
use DSA RAID disks, but you cannot use DSA-specific features such as
watching RAID health.

4.2.12. I have an IBM EtherJet PCI card, it is detected by the fxp(4)
driver correctly, but the lights on the card don't come on and it
doesn't connect to the network.

We don't understand why this happens. Neither do IBM (we asked them).
The card is a standard Intel EtherExpress Pro/100 with an IBM label on
it, and these cards normally work just fine. You may see these symptoms
only in some IBM Netfinity servers. The only solution is to install a
different Ethernet adapter.

4.2.13. When I configure the network during installation on an IBM
Netfinity 3500, the system freezes.

There is a problem with the onboard Ethernet in the Netfinity 3500 which
we have not been able to identify at this time. It may be related to the
SMP features of the system being misconfigured. You will have to install
another Ethernet adapter and avoid attempting to configure the onboard
adapter at any time.

4.2.14. When I install onto a drive managed by a Mylex PCI RAID
controller, the system fails to boot (eg. with a read error message).

There is a bug in the Mylex driver which results in it ignoring the
``8GB'' geometry mode setting in the BIOS. Use the 2GB mode instead.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT should subscribe to the
<current@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.
