[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

PkgBase.live

Links:
Website URL: https://alpha.pkgbase.live/

Contact: Mina Galić <me@igalic.co>

PkgBase.live is an unofficial repository for the FreeBSD PkgBase
project. PkgBase packages the FreeBSD base system as ca 330 packages.

The PkgBase project gives users the choice of which parts of the system
to install. Users can choose which parts of the base system to install,
without building their system from source and optionally choose to
install -dbg packages when they need them. PkgBase is built with default
options. There’s no need to build WITHOUT_SENDMAIL, when users can just
chose not to install it! In addition, PkgBase.live builds every usable
kernel! This is especially important for architectures like armv7.

As a service, PkgBase.live was inspired by up.bsd.live, which provides
freebsd-update(8) for STABLE and CURRENT branches. Despite this
inspiration, freebsd-update has been a constant point of frustrations
for me, so I was looking for alternatives.

PkgBase is not ready for prime time yet, or else the FreeBSD project
would be providing this service. With the call for testing open since
2016, I thought it was time to offer a public service, so a broader part
of the community can take part in testing, without having to do all the
work for themselves.

A lot of things already work fine, but more work needs to be done, as
can be seen from the TODO list, as well as the "Pending Changes" on the
website. Perhaps the most important thing would be to provide ISOs which
lets people setup a fresh system with PkgBase from the get-go.

Hardware for PkgBase is kindly sponsored by a member of the FreeBSD
community.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 1, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
