[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

New Bluetooth® configuration daemon: blued

Links:
blued git URL: https://git.lysator.liu.se/kempe/blued

Contact:
Mail: kempe@lysator.liu.se
IRC: kempe@libera.chat

Introduction

The blued utility provides an IPC interface that lets an unprivileged
user connect to and use Bluetooth devices in a user-friendly way and
supports secure simple pairing (public-key cryptography and if the
device allows it man-in-the-middle protection).

What is blued?

There are three parts to blued: a library, a daemon and a command line
utility. The library abstracts away bluetooth details, the daemon
manages Bluetooth devices and the command line utility lets users list
or scan for Bluetooth devices, pair with a device, or unpair from one.
The command line utility communicates with the daemon via a UNIX socket.

Unlike bthidd and hcsecd, blued supports secure simple pairing and
provides an IPC. To get a HID device to work, bthidd is still needed. A
script is provided to pair a Bluetooth device and appropriately
configure bthidd so it just works and reconnects without user
intervention.

Once pairing has proven stable and bugs have been ironed out, the plan
is to integrate bthidd with/into blued in some way to have HID devices
automatically start functioning when paired without the use of an
external script. A long-term goal is to provide a graphical user
interface that can list devices and provide a simple one-click setup to
connect them.

Installing and using blued v0.1

You need the optional src component installed in /etc/src.

First, make sure you have working Bluetooth drivers loaded as explained
in the FreeBSD handbook.

To test blued, fetch the blued v0.1 source code. Then compile it, patch
your FreeBSD kernel with the patches in kernel_patches, and recompile
the hci module as explained in README.

I have primarily tested blued on FreeBSD 12.3, but my patches applied
cleanly on 13.1 when I tested. I am not supplying a port at the moment,
but it is possible to run the software straight from the build directory
or run "make install" that will install all needed files. Both blued and
bluecontrol use capsicum and blued can be configured to drop its root
privileges.

For more information, refer to the Running blued section of README.

Helping out

Testing

I have only tried this software with my own mouse and realise that a
sample size of one single bluetooth device is pretty small. I’m
expecting issues and am greatly looking forward to feedback from others!

In case of trouble, output from /var/log/debug.log and /var/log/messages
as well as a traffic dump from "hcidump -x" while trying to pair will
help with troubleshooting.

Contributing

If you want to get involved with the code and submit patches, you’re
welcome to visit the repository on Lysator’s Git.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: August 2, 2022 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
