[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

FreeBSD in Science

Links:
Meta-port for Biostar Handbook tools URL:
https://www.freshports.org/biology/biostar-tools/
Simple, Portable Cluster Manager URL: https://acadix.biz/spcm.php
Desktop-installer URL: https://acadix.biz/desktop-installer.php

Contact: Jason Bacon <jwb@FreeBSD.org>
Contact: Yuri Victorovich <yuri@FreeBSD.org>

FreeBSD has long provided a solid foundation for scientific computing,
with its remarkable reliability, network and storage performance, and
the FreeBSD ports system which not only provides an extensive collection
of scientific software, but also facilitates optimized installation by
allowing the user to easily install from source with additional compiler
flags.

Last quarter saw the introduction of sysutils/spcm (Simple, Portable
Cluster Manager), an integrated tool set for building and managing HPC
(High Performance Computing) clusters based on FreeBSD.

This quarter we saw rapid growth in the biology category, much of which
culminated in the completion of the biology/biostar-tools metaport. This
metaport installs virtually all of the software needed by
bioinformatician in training. It is now easier for bioinformatics
students to install and run the software they need on FreeBSD than on
any other platform. Bioinformatics is the analysis of biological data
such as gene and protein sequences.

We also hit a milestone of 200 ports in the biology category, thanks to
contributions from 21 maintainers. Software installation has always been
and still is a major hurdle for many researchers. Far too often,
researchers attempt "cave man" installations, following primitive
instructions from the developers' site for manually running configure
scripts and make. In many other cases, they struggle with low-quality
application containers or third-party on package managers that are prone
to failures and difficult to use. Problems installing the software they
need often cause major delays in their research and often end in
failure. The rapid growth of scientific software in the FreeBSD ports
collection, coupled with the introduction of SPCM and numerous
improvements to sysutils/desktop-installer, have removed many hurdles
that could delay or prevent scientific discovery.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: July 24, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
