[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 4.7-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v 1.1.2.97
2003/03/20 20:03:52 bmah Exp $

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 4.7-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release. This information
  includes security advisories, as well as news relating to the software
  or documentation that could affect its operation or usability. An
  up-to-date version of this document should always be consulted before
  installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 4.7-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains ``late-breaking news'' about FreeBSD
4.7-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the ``current errata'' for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 4-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

Buffer overflows in kadmind(8) and k5admin could potentially cause the
administrative server to execute arbitrary code. Bugfix and workaround
information can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:40.

Errors in smrsh(8), which could allow users to circumvent restrictions
on what programs can be executed, were fixed in FreeBSD 4.7-RELEASE.
Because the applicable security advisory (FreeBSD-SA-02:41) was not
issued after the release, this fact was not included in the release
notes.

Buffer overflows in the DNS resolver(3), which could cause some
applications to fail, have been corrected. This change was not mentioned
in the release notes, as the applicable security advisory
(FreeBSD-SA-02:42) was not issued until after the release.

Several vulnerabilities exist in the version of BIND included with
FreeBSD 4.7-RELEASE. More information, including bugfixes and workaround
suggestions, can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:43.

A file descriptor leak in the fpathconf(2) system call, can allow a
local user to crash the system or cause a privilege escalation. Bugfix
information can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:44.

Remotely exploitable vulnerabilities in CVS could allow an attacker to
execute arbitrary comands on a CVS server. More details can be found in
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:01.

A timing-based attack on OpenSSL, could allow a very powerful attacker
access to plaintext under certain circumstances. This problem has been
corrected in FreeBSD 4.8-RC with an upgrade to OpenSSL 0.9.7. On
supported security fix branches, this problem has been corrected with
the import of OpenSSL 0.9.6i. See security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:02 for
more details.

It may be possible to recover the shared secret key used by the
implementation of the ``syncookies'' feature. This reduces its
effectiveness in dealing with TCP SYN flood denial-of-service attacks.
Workaround information and fixes are given in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-03:03.

Due to a buffer overflow in header parsing in sendmail, a remote
attacker can create a specially-crafted message that may cause
sendmail(8) to execute arbitrary code with the privileges of the user
running it, typically root. More information, including pointers to
patches, can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:04.

The XDR encoder/decoder does incorrect bounds-checking, which could
allow a remote attacker to cause a denial-of-service. For bugfix
information, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:05.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Late-Breaking News

Due to concerns over the licensing terms for the matcd(4) driver
uncovered late in FreeBSD 4.7-RELEASE's release cycle, the matcd(4)
driver was removed. These issues are being addressed and this driver may
reappear in a future release of FreeBSD.

The srelease distribution contains object files for sysinstall(8) in the
release/sysinstall directory. These files were generated during the
release building process but, for some reason, were not removed from the
distribution files. They are harmless.

The databases/rdfdb and mail/ssmtp packages included in the 4.7-RELEASE
package set cannot be installed correctly. A workaround is to build and
install these programs using the Ports Collection.

The net/gnomeicu package included in the 4.7-RELEASE package set may not
run correctly, due to a missing dependency on the net/gnet package. To
work around this problem, install net/gnet either from a package or the
Ports Collection, preferably before installing net/gnomeicu.

The release notes for FreeBSD 4.7-RELEASE incorrectly stated that the -J
option to xargs(1) is deprecated. In fact, there are no plans to remove
this option.

ftpd(8) has a bug in its virtual hosting function triggered if
/etc/ftphosts defines a virtual host whose IP address can resolve back
to a hostname. In that case the daemon will be exiting on SIGSEGV
(signal 11) if started from inetd(8), or may malfunction unpredictably
if running stand-alone. This bug has been fixed in FreeBSD 4.8-RC.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 4-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
