[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Intel wireless towards 11ac

Links:
Intel iwlwifi status FreeBSD wiki page URL:
https://wiki.freebsd.org/WiFi/Iwlwifi

Contact: Bjoern A. Zeeb <bz@FreeBSD.org>

The ongoing project aims to support the latest Intel wireless chipsets
on FreeBSD using LinuxKPI compat code backed by native net80211 and
kernel code. In addition work is on the way to support 11n and 11ac
standards in the LinuxKPI 802.11 compat code and fill gaps for mostly
11ac in the native net80211 wireless stack.

For the Intel iwlwifi wireless driver there were no major updates in the
last months. We updated the firmware to the latest publicly available
version and fixed some of the most visible bugs. Work is also on the way
to support the D3 power saving code.

LinuxKPI compat code also got some improvements and fixes which at times
were only observable on certain generations of iwlwifi chipsets.

Changes in net80211 and LinuxKPI compat code for 11n and 11ac have
little public visibility so far in order to not break basic support.
Updates to constants based on newer 802.11 standards and other changes
without user-visible effect were merged, and functional changes will
follow in the coming months, initially hidden behind compile-time or
runtime options.

Improvements and updates were largely merged back to stable/13 for the
benefit of the users tracking this branch and to help with more testing.

For the latest state of the development, please follow the
freebsd-wireless mailing list and check the wiki pages.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: October 18, 2022 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
