[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 6.3-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008 The
FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: stable/6/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml
181797 2008-08-17 13:01:37Z bmah $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “®” symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 6.3-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release or too late in
  the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
  documentation. This information includes security advisories, as well
  as news relating to the software or documentation that could affect
  its operation or usability. An up-to-date version of this document
  should always be consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 6.3-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 6.4-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains “late-breaking news” about FreeBSD
6.3-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the “current errata” for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 6-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://security.FreeBSD.org/ or ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Late-Breaking News and Corrections

[20080204] The ISO images of FreeBSD 6.3-RELEASE are sized for 700MB
CD-ROM media (ISO images of all prior versions assumed 650MB media).
This fact should have been mentioned in the release notes.

[20080204] Contrary to the release notes, ipfwpcap(8) is not a feature
included in FreeBSD 6.3-RELEASE. It was merged to the 6-STABLE codeline
after the release branch was created. This utility will be included in
subsequent snapshots of 6-STABLE and in 6.4-RELEASE.

[20080229] The release notes gave an incorrect version number for KDE.
The correct version number is 3.5.8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Security Advisories

The following security advisories pertain to FreeBSD 6.3-RELEASE. For
more information, consult the individual advisories available from
http://security.FreeBSD.org/.

+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| Advisory    | Date        | Topic                                    |
+=============+=============+==========================================+
| SA-08:      | 14 Fe       | sendfile(2) write-only file permission   |
| 03.sendfile | bruary 2008 | bypass                                   |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA-08       | 17          | OpenSSH X11-forwarding privilege         |
| :05.openssh |  April 2008 | escalation                               |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA          | 1           | DNS cache poisoning                      |
| -08:06.bind | 3 July 2008 |                                          |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Known Problems and Solutions

[20080229] A bug in Linux emulation may cause segmentation faults for
some Linux programs using mmap(2). This issue has been fixed on the HEAD
and RELENG_6 branches.

[20080229, updated 20080420] Multithreaded programs that perform a
fork(2) operation may crash due to a race condition in the threading
library. This problem has been fixed on the HEAD, RELENG_6, and
RELENG_6_3 branches, and is addressed by errata notice
FreeBSD-EN-08:01.libpthread.

[20080307] When using sysinstall(8) to install the X.org packages,
selecting only specific components to be installed may result in the
x11/xorg-drivers package not being installed, and a corresponding
failure of X.org server to configure itself correctly. The recommended
way to a functioning X.org installation is simply to select All from the
Distributions menu.

[20080420] A reference counting bug in the IP multicast code could cause
kernel panics under some circumstances. It has been fixed on the
RELENG_6 branch by revision 1.85.2.10 of sys/netinet/in.c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://www.FreeBSD.org/snapshots/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 6-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
