[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/amd64 5.5-RELEASE Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 The FreeBSD
Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/common/new.sgml,v
1.761.2.59.2.2 2006/05/22 17:05:47 bmah Exp $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

IBM, AIX, EtherJet, Netfinity, OS/2, PowerPC, PS/2, S/390, and ThinkPad
are trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in the
United States, other countries, or both.

IEEE, POSIX, and 802 are registered trademarks of Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. in the United States.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the ``™''
or the ``®'' symbol.

The release notes for FreeBSD 5.5-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system since 5.4-RELEASE. This document
lists applicable security advisories that were issued since the last
release, as well as significant changes to the FreeBSD kernel and
userland. Some brief remarks on upgrading are also presented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 What's New

2.1 Security Advisories

2.2 Kernel Changes

2.2.1 Boot Loader Changes

2.2.2 Hardware Support

2.2.3 Network Protocols

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

2.2.5 File Systems

2.2.6 Contributed Software

2.3 Userland Changes

2.3.1 /etc/rc.d Scripts

2.4 Contributed Software

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

2.7 Documentation

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 5.5-RELEASE on the
AMD64 hardware platform. It describes recently added, changed, or
deleted features of FreeBSD. It also provides some notes on upgrading
from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 5.5-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/ or any of its mirrors. More
information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the ``Obtaining FreeBSD'' appendix to the
FreeBSD Handbook.

All users are encouraged to consult the release errata before installing
FreeBSD. The errata document is updated with ``late-breaking''
information discovered late in the release cycle or after the release.
Typically, it contains information on known bugs, security advisories,
and corrections to documentation. An up-to-date copy of the errata for
FreeBSD 5.5-RELEASE can be found on the FreeBSD Web site.

FreeBSD 5.5-RELEASE is the last planned release on the 5.5-STABLE
branch. The FreeBSD development community is currently focusing its
efforts on the 6-STABLE and CURRENT codelines. No new major features are
planned for the 5.5-STABLE branch, although minor updates and bugfixes
may be merged at the discretion of individual developers. The FreeBSD
security team will support the 5.5-RELEASE-based security branch with
advisories and security patches until the end-of-life date documented at
http://security.freebsd.org/ (as of this writing, 31 May 2008).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 What's New

This section describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 5.4-RELEASE.

Typical release note items document recent security advisories issued
after 5.4-RELEASE, new drivers or hardware support, new commands or
options, major bug fixes, or contributed software upgrades. They may
also list changes to major ports/packages or release engineering
practices. Clearly the release notes cannot list every single change
made to FreeBSD between releases; this document focuses primarily on
security advisories, user-visible changes, and major architectural
improvements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Security Advisories

Because of an information disclosure vulnerability on processors using
Hyper-Threading Technology (HTT), the machdep.hyperthreading_allowed
sysctl variable has been added. It defaults to 1 (HTT enabled) on
FreeBSD CURRENT, and 0 (HTT disabled) on the 4-STABLE and 5-STABLE
development branches and supported security fix branches. More
information can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:09.htt.

A bug in the tcpdump(1) utility which allows a malicious remote user to
cause a denial-of-service by using specially crafted packets, has been
fixed. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-05:10.tcpdump.

Two problems in the gzip(1) utility have been fixed. These may allow a
local user to modify permissions of arbitrary files and overwrite
arbitrary local files when uncompressing a file. For more information,
see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:11.gzip.

A bug has been fixed in ipfw(4) that could cause packets to be matched
incorrectly against a lookup table. This bug only affects SMP machines
or UP machines that have the PREEMPTION kernel option enabled. More
information is contained in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:13.ipfw.

Two security-related problems have been fixed in bzip2(1). These include
a potential denial of service and unauthorized manipulation of file
permissions. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-05:14.bzip2.

Two problems in FreeBSD's TCP stack have been fixed. They could allow
attackers to stall existing TCP connections, creating a
denial-of-service situation. More information is contained in security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:15.tcp.

Two buffer overflows in the zlib library has been corrected. More
information can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:16.zlib and
FreeBSD-SA-05:18.zlib.

A security vulnerability that could allow processes running inside a
jail(2) to gain access to hidden devfs(5) file nodes has been corrected,
as described in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:17.devfs.

A programming error in the ipsec(4) implementation, which resulted in
AES-XCBC-MAC authentication using a constant key, has been corrected.
More details are in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:19.ipsec.

A temporary file vulnerability in cvsbug(8), which could allow an
attacker to modify or overwrite files with the permissions of a user
running the cvsbug(8) utility, has been fixed. More details can be found
in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:20.cvsbug.

A bug in OpenSSL that could allow an attacker to force an use older
version of the SSL (with known weakensses) has been corrected. Details
can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:21.openssl.

A temporary file vulnerability in texindex(1), which could allow a local
attacker to overwrite files in the context of a user running the
texindex(1) utility, has been fixed. For more details see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-06:01.texindex.

A temporary file vulnerability in the ee(1) text editor, which could
allow a local attacker to overwrite files in the context of a user
running ee(1), has been fixed. For more details see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-06:02.ee.

Several vulnerabilities in the cpio(1) utility have been corrected. For
more details see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-06:03.cpio.

Two instances in which portions of kernel memory could be disclosed to
users have been fixed. For more details see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-06:06.kmem.

A logic bug in the IP fragment handling in pf(4), which could cause a
crash under certain circumstances, has been fixed. For more details see
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-06:07.pf.

An error in Selective Acknowledgement (SACK) support in the TCP/IP
stack, which could cause an infinite loop upon reception of a particular
series of packets, has been corrected. More details are contained in
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-06:08.sack.

A logic bug in the OpenSSH performs internal accounting, which could
cause the master decides that it is overloaded and stops accepting
client connections, has been fixed. For more details see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-06:09.openssh.

A logic bug in the NFS server code, which could cause a crash when the
server received a message with a zero-length payload, has been fixed.
For more details see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-06:10.nfs.

A programming error in the fast_ipsec(4) implementation results in the
sequence number associated with a Security Association not being
updated, allowing packets to unconditionally pass sequence number
verification checks, has been fixed. For more details see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-06:11.ipsec.

A logic bug that could cause opiepasswd(1) to allow an unprivileged user
to configure OPIE authentication for the root user under certain
circumstances, has been fixed. For more details see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-06:12.opie.

An asynchronous signal handling vulnerability in sendmail(8), which
could allow a remote attacker to execute arbitrary code with the
privileges of the user running sendmail, typically root, has been fixed.
For more details see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-06:13.sendmail.

An information disclosure issue found in FreeBSD kernel running on 7th
and 8th generation of AMD processors has been fixed. For more details
see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-06:14.fpu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Kernel Changes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1 Boot Loader Changes

The autoboot command will now prevent the user from interrupting the
boot process at all if the autoboot_delay variable is set to -1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2 Hardware Support

Dual-core processors (such as the Intel Core Duo) now have both cores
available for use by default in SMP-enabled kernels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.1 Multimedia Support

The uaudio(4) driver now has some added functionality, including volume
control on more inputs and recording capability on some devices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.2 Network Interface Support

The bge(4) driver now supports the BCM5714 and 5789 chips.

The ixgb(4) driver is now MPSAFE.

Drivers using the ndis(4) device driver wrapper mechanism are now built
and loaded differently. The ndis(4) driver can now be pre-built as
module or statically compiled into a kernel. Individual drivers can now
be built with the ndisgen(8) utility; the result is a kernel module that
can be loaded into a running kernel using kldload(8).

Many (but not all) changes to the ndis(4) system were merged from HEAD.

The xl(4) driver now supports polling(4).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.3 Network Protocols

The if_bridge(4) network bridging implementation, originally from
NetBSD, has been added. It supports the IEEE 802.1D Spanning Tree
Protocol, individual interface devices for each bridge, filtering of
bridged packets, and span ports (which transmit a copy of every frame
received by the bridge). The ifconfig(8) utility now supports
configuration of if_bridge(4).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

The twa(4) driver has been updated to the 9.3.0.1 release on the 3ware
Web site.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.5 File Systems

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.6 Contributed Software

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Userland Changes

The bsdiff(1) and bspatch(1) utilities have been added. These are tools
for constructing and applying binary patches.

The cmp(1) utility now supports an -h flag to compare the symbolic link
itself rather than the file that the link points to.

The gethostbyname(3), gethostbyname2(3), and gethostbyaddr(3) functions
are now thread-safe.

The getnetent(3), getnetbyname(3), and getnetbyaddr(3) functions are now
thread-safe.

The getprotoent(3), getprotobyname(3), and getprotobynumber(3) functions
are now thread-safe.

The getservent(3), getservbyname(3), and getservbyport(3) functions are
now thread-safe.

The kdump(1) program now supports a -s flag to suppress the display of
I/O data.

The kldstat(8) utility now supports a -m option to return the status of
a specific kernel module.

The default stack sizes in libpthread, libthr, and libc_r have been
increased. On 32-bit platforms, the main thread receives a 2MB stack
size by default, with other threads receiving a 1MB stack size by
default. On 64-bit platforms, the default stack sizes are 4MB and 2MB
respectively.

The netstat(1) utility now supports an -h flag for interface stats mode,
which prints all interface statistics in human readable form.

The ping(8) utility now supports a ``sweeping ping'' in which icmp(4)
payload of packets being sent is increased with given step. This is
useful for testing problematic channels, MTU issues or traffic policing
functions in networks.

The powerd(8) program for managing power consumption has been added.

The rfcomm_sppd(1) program now supports service names in addition to -c
option with channel number. The supported names are: DUN (Dial-Up
Networking), FAX (Fax), LAN (LAN Access Using PPP), and SP (Serial
Port).

The rm(1) utility now supports an -I option that asks for confirmation
(once) if recursively removing directories or if more than 3 files are
listed in the command line.

sed(1) now supports a -l option to make its output line-buffered.

The sh(1) utility now supports the times built-in command.

The snapinfo(8) utility, which shows snapshot locations on UFS
filesystems, has been added.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1 /etc/rc.d Scripts

The bluetooth script has been added. This script will be called from
devd(8) in response to device attachment/detachment events and to
stop/start particular device without unplugging it by hand. The
configuration parameters are in /etc/defaults/bluetooth.device.conf, and
can be overridden by using /etc/bluetooth/$device.conf (where $device is
ubt0, btcc0, and so on.) For more details, see bluetooth.conf(5).

The rc.d/jail startup script now supports jail_name_flags variable which
allows to specify jail(8) flags.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4 Contributed Software

BIND has been updated from 9.3.1 to 9.3.2.

sendmail has been updated from version 8.13.3 to version 8.13.6.

The timezone database has been updated from the tzdata2005g release to
the tzdata2006g release.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

The pkg_add(1) program now supports an -P flag, which is the same as the
-p flag except that the given prefix is also used recursively for the
dependency packages if any.

The pkg_add(1) and pkg_create(1) utilities now support a -K flag to save
packages to the current directory (or PKGDIR if defined) by default.

The pkg_create(1) program now supports an -x flag to support basic
regular expressions for package name, an -E flag for extended regular
expressions, and a -G for exact matching.

The pkg_version(1) utility now supports a -I flag, which causes only the
INDEX file to be used for determining if a package is out of date.

The pkg_version(1) utility now supports an -o flag to show the origin
recorded on package generation instead of the package name, and an -O
flag to list packages whose registered origin is origin only.

The portsnap(8) utility (sysutils/portsnap) has been added into the
FreeBSD base system. This is a secure, easy to use, fast, lightweight,
and generally good way for users to keep their ports trees up to date.

The suffix of startup scripts from the Ports Collection has been
removed. This means foo.sh is renamed to foo, and now scripts whose name
is something like foo.ORG will also be invoked. You are recommended to
reinstall packages which install such scripts and remove extra files in
the local_startup directory.

New rc.conf variables, ldconfig_local_dirs and ldconfig_local32_dirs
have been added. These hold lists of local ldconfig(8) directories.

The @cwd command in pkg-plist now allows no directory argument. If no
directory argument is given, it will set current working directory to
the first prefix given by the @cwd command.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

The supported version of the GNOME desktop environment (x11/gnome2) has
been updated from 2.10.2 to 2.12.3.

The supported version of the KDE desktop environment (x11/kde3) has been
updated from 3.4.2 to 3.5.1.

The supported version of the Perl interpreter (lang/perl5.8) has been
updated from 5.8.7 to 5.8.8.

The supported version of the Xorg windowing system (x11/xorg) has been
updated from 6.8.2 to 6.9.0.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7 Documentation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

If you're upgrading from a previous release of FreeBSD, you generally
will have three options:

-   Using the binary upgrade option of sysinstall(8). This option is
    perhaps the quickest, although it presumes that your installation of
    FreeBSD uses no special compilation options.

-   Performing a complete reinstall of FreeBSD. Technically, this is not
    an upgrading method, and in any case is usually less convenient than
    a binary upgrade, in that it requires you to manually backup and
    restore the contents of /etc. However, it may be useful in cases
    where you want (or need) to change the partitioning of your disks.

-   From source code in /usr/src. This route is more flexible, but
    requires more disk space, time, and technical expertise. More
    information can be found in the ``Using make world'' section of the
    FreeBSD Handbook. Upgrading from very old versions of FreeBSD may be
    problematic; in cases like this, it is usually more effective to
    perform a binary upgrade or a complete reinstall.

Please read the INSTALL.TXT file for more information, preferably before
beginning an upgrade. If you are upgrading from source, please be sure
to read /usr/src/UPDATING as well.

Finally, if you want to use one of various means to track the -STABLE or
-CURRENT branches of FreeBSD, please be sure to consult the ``-CURRENT
vs. -STABLE'' section of the FreeBSD Handbook.

  Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should, of course, only be attempted
  after backing up all data and configuration files.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
