[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v
1.1.2.122 2004/03/30 18:18:34 kensmith Exp $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of Wind River Systems, Inc. This is
expected to change soon.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the ``™''
or the ``®'' symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release or too late in
  the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
  documentation. This information includes security advisories, as well
  as news relating to the software or documentation that could affect
  its operation or usability. An up-to-date version of this document
  should always be consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 4.10-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains ``late-breaking news'' about FreeBSD
4.9-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the ``current errata'' for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 4-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

(5 Dec 2003) BIND contains the potential for a denial-of-service attack.
This vulnerability has been addressed by a vendor patch on the
4.9-RELEASE security fix branch and by the import of a new version to
the 4-STABLE development branch. For more information, see
FreeBSD-SA-03:19.

(8 Feb 2004) A bug with the System V Shared Memory interface
(specifically the shmat(2) system call) can cause a shared memory
segment to reference unallocated kernel memory. In turn, this can permit
a local attacker to gain unauthorized access to parts of kernel memory,
possibly resulting in disclosure of sensitive information, bypass of
access control mechanisms, or privilege escalation. More details,
including bugfix and workaround information, can be found in security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:02.

(4 Mar 2004) It is possible for a remote attacker to conduct a
low-bandwidth denial-of-service attack against a machine providing
TCP-based services, filling up the target's memory buffers and
potentially leading to a system crash. This vulnerability has been
addressed on the FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE security fix branch. Security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:04 contains more details, as well as information
on patching existing systems.

(17 Mar 2004) By performing a specially crafted SSL/TLS handshake with
an application that uses OpenSSL a null pointer may be dereferenced.
This may in turn cause the application to crash, resulting in a denial
of service attack. For more information see the Security Advisory
FreeBSD-SA-04:05 which contains more details and instructions on how to
patch existing systems.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Late-Breaking News

(28 Oct 2003) Very late in the release cycle, a change was made to the
HyperThreading (HTT) support on Intel® processors. HTT support is now
enabled by default on SMP-capable kernels; as a result, the HTT kernel
option is unnecessary and has been removed. The extra logical CPUs are
always started so that they can handle interrupts, but are prevented
from executing user processes by default. To enable the logical CPUs,
change the value of the machdep.hlt_logical_cpus sysctl(8) variable from
1 to 0. This value can also be set from the loader as a tunable of the
same name. This behavior is now identical to FreeBSD 5.X.

(29 Oct 2003) Some of the packages contained in the first CD-ROM depend
on different versions of the OpenLDAP packages, which cannot co-exist on
the same host. One manifestation of this problem is that it is not
possible to install both the x11/gnome2 and x11/kde3 packages.

(30 Oct 2003) It appears that the crypto distribution is required for
correct functioning of the FreeBSD base system. At the very least, the
libraries contained in the crypto distribution are required for
pkg_add(1).

(30 Oct 2003) There are known cases of fairly-recent i386 machines with
BIOSes that do not support booting from emulation mode El Torito CDROMs.
This prevents booting from the FreeBSD 4.9-STABLE CDROMs. As a
workaround, download the floppy disk images, use them to boot the
machine into sysinstall(8), and then do a CDROM install. This problem
does not seem to be wide-spread as of this writing.

  Note: FreeBSD 5.X uses non-emulation El Torito booting on its CDROM
  releases by default. These, of course, cannot be booted on very old
  i386 machines that only support emulation mode.

(10 Nov 2003) An update was made to the xterm entry in the termcap(5)
database which, among other things, removed the (already deprecated) bs
backspacing capability. The hack(6) game appears to depend on this
capability and hence fails when run from inside a window with a terminal
type of xterm.

(10 Nov 2003) Tagged queueing in the ata(4) driver is broken and appears
to cause kernel panics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 4-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
