[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

Â 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 10.3-RELEASE Release Notes

Abstract

The release notes for FreeBSD 10.3-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system on the 10.2-STABLE development
line. This document lists applicable security advisories that were
issued since the last release, as well as significant changes to the
FreeBSD kernel and userland. Some brief remarks on upgrading are also
presented.

Table of Contents

-   Introduction

-   Upgrading from Previous Releases of FreeBSD

-   Security and Errata

    -   Security Advisories

    -   Errata Notices

-   Userland

    -   Userland Application Changes

    -   Contributed Software

    -   Installation and Configuration Tools

    -   /etc/rc.d Scripts

-   Kernel

    -   Kernel Bug Fixes

    -   Kernel Configuration

    -   System Tuning and Controls

-   Devices and Drivers

    -   Device Drivers

    -   Storage Drivers

    -   Network Drivers

-   Hardware Support

    -   Hardware Support

    -   Virtualization Support

-   Storage

    -   ZFS

-   Boot Loader Changes

    -   Boot Loader Changes

    -   Boot Menu Changes

-   Networking

Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 10.3-RELEASE. It
describes recently added, changed, or deleted features of FreeBSD. It
also provides some notes on upgrading from previous versions of FreeBSD.

The snapshot distribution to which these release notes apply represents
a point along the 10.3-STABLE development branch between 10.2-RELEASE
and the future 10.4-RELEASE. Information regarding pre-built, binary
snapshot distributions along this branch can be found at
https://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/.

All users are encouraged to consult the release errata before installing
FreeBSD. The errata document is updated with "late-breaking" information
discovered late in the release cycle or after the release. Typically, it
contains information on known bugs, security advisories, and corrections
to documentation. An up-to-date copy of the errata for FreeBSD
10.3-RELEASE can be found on the FreeBSD Web site.

This document describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 10.2-RELEASE.

Typical release note items document recent security advisories issued
after 10.2-RELEASE, new drivers or hardware support, new commands or
options, major bug fixes, or contributed software upgrades. They may
also list changes to major ports/packages or release engineering
practices. Clearly the release notes cannot list every single change
made to FreeBSD between releases; this document focuses primarily on
security advisories, user-visible changes, and major architectural
improvements.

Upgrading from Previous Releases of FreeBSD

[amd64,i386] Binary upgrades between RELEASE versions (and snapshots of
the various security branches) are supported using the freebsd-update(8)
utility. The binary upgrade procedure will update unmodified userland
utilities, as well as unmodified GENERIC kernel distributed as a part of
an official FreeBSD release. The freebsd-update(8) utility requires that
the host being upgraded have Internet connectivity.

Source-based upgrades (those based on recompiling the FreeBSD base
system from source code) from previous versions are supported, according
to the instructions in /usr/src/UPDATING.

Important:
Upgrading FreeBSD should only be attempted after backing up all data and
configuration files.

Security and Errata

This section lists the various Security Advisories and Errata Notices
since 10.2-RELEASE.

Security Advisories

+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| Advisory                  | Date               | Topic              |
+===========================+====================+====================+
| FreeBSD-SA-15:20.expat    | 18 August 2015     | Fix multiple       |
|                           |                    | integer overflows  |
|                           |                    | in libbsdxml(3).   |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-15:22.openssh  | 25 August 2015     | Multiple           |
|                           |                    | vulnerabilities    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-15:24.rpcbind  | 29 September 2015  | Remote denial of   |
|                           |                    | service            |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-15:25.ntp      | 26 October 2015    | Multiple           |
|                           |                    | vulnerabilities    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-15:26.openssl  | 5 December 2015    | Multiple           |
|                           |                    | vulnerabilities    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:01.sctp     | 14 January 2016    | ICMPv6 error       |
|                           |                    | message            |
|                           |                    | vulnerability      |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:02.ntp      | 14 January 2016    | Panic threshold    |
|                           |                    | bypass             |
|                           |                    | vulnerability      |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:03.linux    | 14 January 2016    | Incorrect futex    |
|                           |                    | handling           |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:04.linux    | 14 January 2016    | setgroups(2)       |
|                           |                    | system call        |
|                           |                    | vulnerability      |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:05.tcp      | 14 January 2016    | MD5 signature      |
|                           |                    | denial of service  |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:06.bsnmpd   | 14 January 2016    | Insecure default   |
|                           |                    | configuration file |
|                           |                    | permissions        |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:07.openssh  | 14 January 2016    | OpenSSH client     |
|                           |                    | information leak   |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:09.ntp      | 27 January 2016    | Multiple           |
|                           |                    | vulnerabilities.   |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:10.linux    | 27 January 2016    | issetugid(2)       |
|                           |                    | system call        |
|                           |                    | vulnerability.     |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:11.openssl  | 30 January 2016    | SSLv2 cipher suite |
|                           |                    | downgrade          |
|                           |                    | vulnerability.     |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Errata Notices

+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| Errata                    | Date               | Topic              |
+===========================+====================+====================+
| F                         | 18 August 2015     | Fix make(1) syntax |
| reeBSD-EN-15:11.toolchain |                    | errors when        |
|                           |                    | upgrading from     |
|                           |                    | FreeBSD 9.x and    |
|                           |                    | earlier.           |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-15:12.netstat  | 18 August 2015     | Fix incorrect      |
|                           |                    | netstat(1) data    |
|                           |                    | handling on 32-bit |
|                           |                    | systems.           |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| Fr                        | 18 August 2015     | Allow size         |
| eeBSD-EN-15:13.vidcontrol |                    | argument to        |
|                           |                    | vidcontrol(1) for  |
|                           |                    | syscons(4).        |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-15:15.pkg      | 25 August 2015     | Insufficient check |
|                           |                    | of supported       |
|                           |                    | pkg(7) signature   |
|                           |                    | methods.           |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-15:16.pw       | 16 September 2015  | Fix pw(8)          |
|                           |                    | regression when    |
|                           |                    | creating numeric   |
|                           |                    | users or groups.   |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-15:17.libc     | 16 September 2015  | Fix libc handling  |
|                           |                    | of signals for     |
|                           |                    | multi-threaded     |
|                           |                    | processes.         |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-15:18.pkg      | 16 September 2015  | Implement pubkey   |
|                           |                    | support for pkg(7) |
|                           |                    | bootstrap.         |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-15:19.kqueue   | 4 November 2015    | kqueue(2) write    |
|                           |                    | events never fire  |
|                           |                    | for files larger   |
|                           |                    | than 2GB.          |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-15:20.vm       | 4 November 2015    | Applications       |
|                           |                    | exiting due to     |
|                           |                    | segmentation       |
|                           |                    | violation on a     |
|                           |                    | correct memory     |
|                           |                    | address.           |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-16:01.filemon  | 14 January 2016    | bmake and          |
|                           |                    | filemon(4)         |
|                           |                    | stability issues.  |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-16:02.pf       | 14 January 2016    | Invalid TCP        |
|                           |                    | checksum issue.    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-16:03.yplib    | 14 January 2016    | YP/NIS library     |
|                           |                    | bug.               |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Userland

This section covers changes and additions to userland applications,
contributed software, and system utilities.

Userland Application Changes

The ar(1) utility now supports a -D flag to prevent real mtime, uid,
gid, and file mode values from being inserted. This is called
"deterministic mode" and useful for making the resulting archives
reproducible. This behavior is enabled by default, and can be disabled
by specifying a -U flag. (r287326,288202) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD
Foundation)

The camcontrol(8) fwdownload subcommand has been improved. Changes
include better support of SATA drives, downloading firmaware to IBM LTO
drives, -q flag to suppress information output, and opcodes subcommand
to issue the REPORT SUPPORTED OPCODES service action of the
SCSI MAINTENANCE IN command. (r286965)

The cp(1) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -s, which
creates a symbolic link to the specified source. (r291774)

A bug in the ctladm(8) utility which could return a non-zero value even
if it succeeds has been fixed. (r285929)

A bug in the grdc(6) program which caused a wrong display in the 12-hour
mode has been fixed. (r288185)

The ifconfig(8) utility now reports SFP/SFP+ data when a -v flag is
specified and the NIC driver provides them. (r286810) (Sponsored by
Yandex LLC)

Bugs in the inetd(8) daemon which could cause a crash when an RPC entry
is defined and an IPv6 address is specified in -a flag have been fixed.
(r288048)

The jail(8) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -l, which
ensures a clean environment in the target jail when used. Additionally,
jail(8) will run a shell within the target jail when run no commands are
specified. (r286064)

The last(1) utility now supports reboot as a pseudo-user name which
prints all system reboot entries (SHUTDOWN_TIME and BOOT_TIME records).
This was accidentally removed as of FreeBSD 9.0. (r286952)

The mv(1) utility now returns 1 instead of 64 when more than two
arguments are specified and the target is not a valid directory.
(r287027)

The mkimg(1) utility has been updated to include support for NTFS
filesystems in both MBR and GPT partitioning schemes. (r287122)

A bug in the mkimg(1) utility which prevented dynamic VHD format from
working with QEMU has been fixed. (r287122)

A bug in the netstat(1) utility which showed the statistics in the
number of packets divided by 1024, not 1000 has been fixed. (r287593)

The pciconf(8) utility has been updated to use the PCI ID database from
the misc/pciids package, if present, falling back to the PCI ID database
in the FreeBSD base system. (r287746)

A new utility, sesutil(8), has been added, which is used to manage
ses(4) devices. (r288710) (Sponsored by Gandi.net)

Support for a -manage-gids flag has been added to nfsuserd(8). This
option can be enabled at boot time by setting an rc.conf(5) variable
nfs_server_managegids to YES. (r292231)

The pkill(1) utility now supports jail(2) name in a -j option in
addition to jail(2) ID. (r287269)

userdel and usermod subcommand of the pw(8) utility now supports a -y
flag. (r287084)

The resolver library has been updated to reload /etc/resolv.conf if the
modification time has changed. (r292462) (Sponsored by Dell, Inc.)

The initial implementation of "reroot" support has been added to the
reboot(8) utility, allowing the root filesystem to be mounted from a
temporary source filesystem without requiring a full system reboot.
(r293744) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The timeout(1) utility has been added. This utility runs a command with
a time limit and is compatible with GNU timeout. (r287392)

The watchdogd(8) daemon now supports a -x exit_timeout option to specify
the timeout period in seconds to leave in effect when the program exits.
(r287080)

The ypinit(8) script now supports eui64 NIS map file. (r287375)

Contributed Software

A bug in libarchive(3) library which could report an error when handling
a sparse file entry in a tar file has been fixed by importing changeset
bf4f6ec64e. (r286082)

Time zone database has been updated to version 2015f. (r286751)

The file(1) utility has been updated to version 5.25. (r290152)

The xz(1) utility has been updated to version 5.2.2, which provides
support for multi-threaded compression. (r292588)

The ntpd(8) utility has been updated to version 4.2.8p5. (r293650)

The unbound(8) utility has been updated to version 1.5.7. (r294190)

The less(1) utility has been updated to version v481. (r294286)

The unbound-control-setup script has been removed from the base system.
(r295690)

The unbound(8) utility has been updated to enable the insecure-lan-zones
option in preference of listing each AS112 zone individually. (r295691)

The OpenSSL suite has been updated to version 1.0.1s. (r296317)

The OpenSSH suite has been updated to version 7.2p2. (r296853)

Installation and Configuration Tools

The bsdinstall(8) utility has been updated to support ZFS installation
on EFI-based systems. (r295264) (Sponsored by ScaleEngine, Inc.)

/etc/rc.d Scripts

The rc.d/netwait script has been updated to wait for network interfaces
that attach late in the boot process, such as some USB network cards.
(r294680)

Firewall rules set by firewall_type="SIMPLE" now uses ipfw(4) tables for
addresses to be blocked. (r287091)

The rc.d/netif script now updates only static routes when an interface
is specified. (r287737)

Kernel

This section covers changes to kernel configurations, system tuning, and
system control parameters that are not otherwise categorized.

The vt(4) terminal console driver now supports ALT_BREAK_TO_DEBUGGER and
debug.kdb.alt_break_to_debugger sysctl variable when kernel debugger
support (options KDB) is enabled. (r286742)

The vt(4) terminal console driver now supports kern.vt.bell_enable
sysctl variable to enable or disable terminal bell. The default is 1
(enabled). (r287782)

A thread_create() function has been added as an API to create userspace
thread in kernel space. (r286843)

Kernel Bug Fixes

The kqueue(2) system call has been updated to handle write events to
files larger than 2 gigabytes. (r288167) (Sponsored by Multiplay)

Kernel Configuration

[amd64,i386] The pms(4) driver has been removed from GENERIC kernel.
(r286132) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

System Tuning and Controls

A sysctl(3) variable kern.features.invariants has been added. It shows
if the kernel is compiled with INVARIANTS or not. (r287438)

A bug which could prevent a loader tunable kern.racct.enable from
working has been fixed. (r286322] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

Devices and Drivers

This section covers changes and additions to devices and device drivers
since 10.2-RELEASE.

Device Drivers

The puc(4) driver now supports MSI interrupts and prefers it to the
legacy interrupts. This behavior can be disabled by setting
hw.puc.msi_disable loader tunable. (r287926)

A bug in the uart(4) driver which could cause a polarity reversal of PPS
(Pulse Per Second) capture events has been fixed. The trailing edge of a
positive PPS pulse and the leading edge of the next pulse were used as
"assert" and "clear" event respectively. (r287037)

The uart(4) driver now supports runtime configuration of PPS signal
source captured by the driver via dev.uart.pps_mode and
dev.uart.0.pps_mode sysctl variables. The values 0, 1, and 2 correspond
to disabled, capturing pulses on the CTS line, and capturing pulses on
the DCD line, respectively. The default value is 2. (r287037)

The uftdi(4) driver now supports UFTDIIOC_READ_EEPROM,
UFTDIIOC_WRITE_EEPROM, and UFTDIIOC_ERASE_EEPROM ioctl(2) to read/write
serial EEPROM attached to the controller chip. (r287035)

Storage Drivers

Legacy ata(4) drivers such as ataahci, ataadaptec, and mv_sata have been
removed in favor of the new drivers such as ahci(4), siis(4), and
mvs(4). (r280451)

The CTL High Availability implementation has been rewritten. (r288732)
(Sponsored by iXsystems)

The ctl(4) driver has been updated to support CD-ROM and removable
devices. (r288810)

The isp(4) driver has been updated and improved: added support for
16Gbps FC cards, improved target mode support, completed Multi-ID (NPIV)
functionality. (Sponsored by iXsystems)

Network Drivers

The ixgbe(4) driver has been updated to version 3.1.13-k. (r295524)
(Sponsored by Limelight Networks, Intel Corporation)

Firmwares for model T4 and T5 bundled with the cxgbe(4) driver have been
updated to version 1.14.4.0. (r286895)

Hardware Support

This section covers general hardware support for physical machines,
hypervisors, and virtualization environments, as well as hardware
changes and updates that do not otherwise fit in other sections of this
document.

Hardware Support

The ismt(4) driver has been added, providing support for recent IntelÂ®
SMBus 2.0 controllers. (r293675)

Virtualization Support

The xen(4) driver has been updated to include support for blkif indirect
segment I/O. (r287802)

Storage

This section covers changes and additions to file systems and other
storage subsystems, both local and networked.

ZFS

The zfs(8) l2arc code has been updated to take ashift into account when
gathering buffers to be written to the l2arc device. (r287665)
(Sponsored by ClusterHQ)

Boot Loader Changes

This section covers the boot loader, boot menu, and other boot-related
changes.

Boot Loader Changes

Initial terminal emulation support has been added to loader.efi for
UEFI-based systems. (r294445)

Initial ZFS boot support has been added to the EFI implementation.
(r294999) (Sponsored by Multiplay)

The UEFI loader has been updated to support multiple ZFS boot
environments, such as those provided by sysutils/beadm. (r295475)
(Sponsored by ScaleEngine, Inc.)

Boot Menu Changes

The UEFI boot menu has been updated to enable the "Beastie" menu,
similiar to the traditional sc(4) boot menu. (r294446)

Networking

This section describes changes that affect networking in FreeBSD.

The epair(4) virtual Ethernet interface and the lagg(4) pseudo interface
now support VIMAGE kernel. (r287594,287723)

A bug in the epair(4) virtual Ethernet interface which could cause a
panic when running ifconfig(8) create and destory quickly has been
fixed. (r287594)

sysctl(3) variables in the lagg(4) pseudo interface
net.link.lagg.N.`* have been removed in favor of per-interface ifconfig(8) flags and options. `ifconfig -v
command shows them. (r287723)

Bugs in the lagg(4) pseudo interface which could cause a system panic
have been fixed. (r287723)

A bug in pf(4) packet filter which could cause a rule with no log
parameter to log the matched packet has been fixed. (r286125) (Sponsored
by Netgate)

A bug in FreeBSD IPv6 stack which did not invoke an LLENTRY_DELETED
event when an L2 address was deleted from the link-level address table
for IPv6. (r286316)

Obsolete APIs, SIOCGDRLST_IN6 and SIOCGPRLST_IN6 in FreeBSD IPv6 stack
have been removed. (r287733)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: January 26, 2021 by Sergio Carlavilla Delgado

Legal Notices | Â© 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
