FreeBSD/pc98 5.3-RELEASE Hardware Information

The FreeBSD German Documentation Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 The FreeBSD Documentation
Project

Copyright © 2002, 2003, 2004 The FreeBSD German Documentation Project

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

Inhaltsverzeichnis

1. Einführung

2. Unterstützte Systeme

3. Unterstützte Geräte

3.1. Festplatten-Controller

3.2. Netzwerkkarten

3.3. FDDI Karten

3.4. ATM Karten

3.5. Karten für drahtlose Netzwerke

3.6. Diverse Netzwerkkarten

3.7. ISDN Karten

3.8. Serielle Schnittstellen

3.9. Audio Hardware

3.10. Kameras, TV-Karten, etc

3.11. USB Geräte

3.12. IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Geräte

3.13. Bluetooth Geräte

3.14. Verschlüsselungs-Hardware

3.15. Diverses

1. Einführung

Dieses Dokument enthält die Liste der unterstützen Geräte für FreeBSD
5.3-RELEASE auf NEC PC-98x1 Systemen (meistens einfach FreeBSD/pc98
5.3-RELEASE genannt). Hier finden Sie zum einen alle die Geräte, von
denen wir wissen, daß Sie funktionieren; zum anderen finden Sie hier
Hinweise, wie Sie den Kernel anpassen können, wenn Sie ein bisher noch
nicht unterstütztes Gerät verwenden wollen.

  Anmerkung: Dieses Dokument enthält Informationen für NEC PC-98x1
  Systeme. Andere Versionen dieses Dokumentes, die für andere
  Plattformen gedacht sind, werden in vielen Punkten von diesem Dokument
  abweichen.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2. Unterstützte Systeme

NEC PC-9801/9821 Systeme mit fast allen i386-kompatiblen Prozessoren,
dazu gehören unter anderem 80386, 80486, Pentium, Pentium Pro und
Pentium II inklusive aller Varianten. Die i386-kompatiblen Prozessoren
von AMD, Cyrix, IBM und IDT werden ebenfalls unterstützt.

NEC FC-9801/9821 und NEC SV-98 (beide sind mit der PC-9801/9821 Familie
kompatibel) sollten auch unterstützt werden.

Die EPSON PC-386/486/586 Familien sind kompatibel zur NEC PC-9801
Familie und sollten auch unterstützt werden.

Der hochauflösende Modus wird nicht unterstützt. Die Familien NEC
PC-98XA/XL/RL/XL^2 und NEC PC-H98 werden nur im normalen (PC-9801
kompatiblen) Modus unterstützt.

Es gibt zwar einige Mehrprozessorsysteme (wie Rs20/B20), die
SMP-Fähigkeiten in FreeBSD werden allerdings noch nicht unterstützt.

Der Standard-Bus des PC-9801/9821 (der sogenannte C-Bus), der
Erweiterungsbus des PC9801NOTE (110 Pin) und der PCI-Bus werden
unterstützt. Der New Extended Standard Architecture (NESA) Bus (wird in
den Familien PC-H98, SV-H98 und FC-H98 genutzt) wird noch nicht
unterstützt.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3. Unterstützte Geräte

$FreeBSD$

Dieses Kapitel enthält alle Geräte, die auf jeden Fall von FreeBSD auf
pc98 Systemen unterstützt werden. Andere Konfigurationen können auch
funktionieren, allerdings wurden sie noch nicht getestet. Rückmeldungen,
Ergänzungen und Korrekturen werden dankend angenommen.

Wenn möglich, wird der zum jeweiligen Gerät bzw. zur jeweiligen
Geräteklasse passende Treiber aufgeführt. Wenn es unter FreeBSD eine
Online-Hilfe für den betreffenden Treiber gibt (das ist der Normalfall),
wird sie ebenfalls aufgeführt. In dieser Online-Hilfe finden Sie
genauere Informationen über vom jeweiligen Treiber unterstützen Geräte
und Controller finden.

  Anmerkung: Die Gerätelisten in diesem Dokument werden automatisch aus
  den FreeBSD-Hilfeseiten generiert. Es kann daher sein, daß einige
  Geräte, die von verschiedenen Treibern unterstützt werden, mehrfach
  auftauchen.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.1. Festplatten-Controller

IDE/ATA Controller ( ata(4) Treiber)

IDE/ATA controllers (wdc Treiber)

-   on-board IDE Controller

The adapters supported by the aic(4) driver include:

-   Adaptec AHA-1505 (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1510A, AHA-1510B (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1520A, AHA-1520B (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1522A, AHA-1522B (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1535 (ISA)

-   Creative Labs SoundBlaster SCSI host adapter (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1460, AHA-1460B, AHA-1460C, AHA-1460D (PC Card)

-   Adaptec AHA-1030B, AHA-1030P (PC98)

-   NEC PC-9801-100 (PC98)

The ahc(4) driver supports the following SCSI host adapter chips and
SCSI controller cards:

-   Adaptec AIC7770 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7850 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7860 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7870 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7880 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7890 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7891 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7892 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7895 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7896 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7897 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7899 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec 274X(W)

-   Adaptec 274X(T)

-   Adaptec 284X

-   Adaptec 2910

-   Adaptec 2915

-   Adaptec 2920

-   Adaptec 2930C

-   Adaptec 2930U2

-   Adaptec 2940

-   Adaptec 2940J

-   Adaptec 2940N

-   Adaptec 2940U

-   Adaptec 2940AU

-   Adaptec 2940UW

-   Adaptec 2940UW Dual

-   Adaptec 2940UW Pro

-   Adaptec 2940U2W

-   Adaptec 2940U2B

-   Adaptec 2950U2W

-   Adaptec 2950U2B

-   Adaptec 19160B

-   Adaptec 29160B

-   Adaptec 29160N

-   Adaptec 3940

-   Adaptec 3940U

-   Adaptec 3940AU

-   Adaptec 3940UW

-   Adaptec 3940AUW

-   Adaptec 3940U2W

-   Adaptec 3950U2

-   Adaptec 3960

-   Adaptec 39160

-   Adaptec 3985

-   Adaptec 4944UW

-   NEC PC-9821Xt13 (PC-98)

-   NEC RvII26 (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B02L/B09 (PC-98)

-   NEC SV-98/2-B03 (PC-98)

-   Many motherboards with on-board SCSI support

The ct(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   ELECOM bus-master SCSI adapters

-   I-O DATA SC-98II

-   ICM IF-2660, IF-2766, IF-2766ET, IF-2767 and IF-2769

-   Logitec LHA-N151 and LHA-20x series

-   Midori-Denshi MDC-554NA and MDC-926R

-   NEC PC-9801-55, 92 and compatibles

-   SMIT transfer type SCSI host adapters

-   TEXA HA-55BS2 and its later models

NEC PC-9801-55, 92 und dazu kompatible C-Bus SCSI Controller (bs
Treiber)

-   NEC PC-9801-55, 92 und kompatible

    ICM IF-2660

    Midori-Denshi MDC-554NA

    Logitec LHA-N151

      Anmerkung: Zur Aktivierung des DMA Transfer Modus muß in der
      Konfigurationsdatei für den Kernel "flags 0x00000" angegeben
      werden.

-   I-O DATA SC-98II

      Anmerkung: Zur Aktivierung des DMA Transfer Modus muß in der
      Konfigurationsdatei für den Kernel "flags 0x10000" angegeben
      werden.

-   TEXA HA-55BS2 und Nachfolger

    Midori-Denshi MDC-926Rs

      Anmerkung: Zur Aktivierung des Bus-Master Transfer Modus muß in
      der Konfigurationsdatei für den Kernel "flags 0x20000" angegeben
      werden.

-   ELECOM Bus-master SCSI interfaces

      Anmerkung: Zur Aktivierung des Bus-Master Transfer Modus muß in
      der Konfigurationsdatei für den Kernel "flags 0x30000" angegeben
      werden.

-   Alle SCSI-Kontroller mit SMIT Transfer

      Anmerkung: Zur Aktivierung des SMIT Transfer Modus muß in der
      Konfigurationsdatei für den Kernel "flags 0x40000" angegeben
      werden.

-   Logitec LHA-20x series

    ICM IF-2766, IF-2766ET, IF-2767 und IF-2769

      Anmerkung: Zur Aktivierung des Bus-Master Transfer Modus muß in
      der Konfigurationsdatei für den Kernel "flags 0x50000" angegeben
      werden.

The adv(4) driver supports the following SCSI controllers:

-   AdvanSys ABP510/5150

-   AdvanSys ABP5140

-   AdvanSys ABP5142

-   AdvanSys ABP902/3902

-   AdvanSys ABP3905

-   AdvanSys ABP915

-   AdvanSys ABP920

-   AdvanSys ABP3922

-   AdvanSys ABP3925

-   AdvanSys ABP930, ABP930U, ABP930UA

-   AdvanSys ABP960, ABP960U

-   AdvanSys ABP542

-   AdvanSys ABP742

-   AdvanSys ABP842

-   AdvanSys ABP940

-   AdvanSys ABP940UA/3940UA

-   AdvanSys ABP940U

-   AdvanSys ABP3960UA

-   AdvanSys ABP970, ABP970U

-   AdvanSys ABP752

-   AdvanSys ABP852

-   AdvanSys ABP950

-   AdvanSys ABP980, ABP980U

-   AdvanSys ABP980UA/3980UA

-   MELCO IFC-USP (PC-98)

-   RATOC REX-PCI30 (PC-98)

-   @Nifty FNECHARD IFC-USUP-TX (PC-98)

The adw(4) driver supports SCSI controllers including:

-   AdvanSys ABP940UW/ABP3940UW

-   AdvanSys ABP950UW

-   AdvanSys ABP970UW

-   AdvanSys ABP3940U2W

-   AdvanSys ABP3950U2W

The amr(4) driver supports the following:

-   AMI MegaRAID 320-1

-   AMI MegaRAID 320-2

-   AMI MegaRAID 320-4X

-   AMI MegaRAID Series 418

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1200 (Series 428)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1300 (Series 434)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1400 (Series 438)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1500 (Series 467)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1600 (Series 471)

-   AMI MegaRAID Elite 1500 (Series 467)

-   AMI MegaRAID Elite 1600 (Series 493)

-   AMI MegaRAID Elite 1650 (Series 4xx)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 100 (Series 466WS)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 200 (Series 466)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 300 (Series 490)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 500 (Series 475)

-   Dell PERC

-   Dell PERC 2/SC

-   Dell PERC 2/DC

-   Dell PERC 3/DCL

-   Dell PERC 3/QC

-   Dell PERC 4/Di

-   HP NetRAID-1/Si

-   HP NetRAID-3/Si (D4943A)

-   HP Embedded NetRAID

The ncr(4) driver provides support for the following NCR/Symbios SCSI
controller chips:

-   53C810

-   53C810A

-   53C815

-   53C820

-   53C825A

-   53C860

-   53C875

-   53C875J

-   53C885

-   53C895

-   53C895A

-   53C896

-   53C1510D

The following add-on boards are known to be supported:

-   I-O DATA SC-98/PCI (PC-98)

-   I-O DATA SC-PCI (PC-98)

The sym(4) driver provides support for the following Symbios/LSI Logic
PCI SCSI controllers:

-   53C810

-   53C810A

-   53C815

-   53C825

-   53C825A

-   53C860

-   53C875

-   53C876

-   53C895

-   53C895A

-   53C896

-   53C897

-   53C1000

-   53C1000R

-   53C1010-33

-   53C1010-66

-   53C1510D

The SCSI controllers supported by sym(4) can be either embedded on a
motherboard, or on one of the following add-on boards:

-   ASUS SC-200, SC-896

-   Data Technology DTC3130 (all variants)

-   DawiControl DC2976UW

-   Diamond FirePort (all)

-   I-O DATA SC-UPCI (PC-98)

-   Logitec LHA-521UA (PC-98)

-   NCR cards (all)

-   Symbios cards (all)

-   Tekram DC390W, 390U, 390F, 390U2B, 390U2W, 390U3D, and 390U3W

-   Tyan S1365

The following devices are currently supported by the ncv(4) driver:

-   I-O DATA PCSC-DV

-   KME KXLC002 (TAXAN ICD-400PN, etc.), KXLC004, and UJDCD450

-   Macnica Miracle SCSI-II mPS110

-   Media Intelligent MSC-110, MSC-200

-   NEC PC-9801N-J03R

-   New Media Corporation BASICS SCSI

-   Qlogic Fast SCSI

-   RATOC REX-9530, REX-5572 (SCSI only)

Controllers supported by the stg(4) driver include:

-   Adaptec 2920/A

-   Future Domain SCSI2GO

-   Future Domain TMC-18XX/3260

-   IBM SCSI PCMCIA Card

-   ICM PSC-2401 SCSI

-   MELCO IFC-SC

-   RATOC REX-5536, REX-5536AM, REX-5536M, REX-9836A

Note that the Adaptec 2920C is supported by the ahc(4) driver.

Cards supported by the isp(4) driver include:

-   ISP1000

-   PTI SBS440

-   ISP1020

-   ISP1040

-   PTI SBS450

-   Qlogic 1240

-   Qlogic 1020

-   Qlogic 1040

-   Qlogic 1080

-   Qlogic 1280

-   Qlogic 12160

-   Qlogic 2100

-   Qlogic 2102

-   Qlogic 2200

-   Qlogic 2202

-   Qlogic 2204

-   Qlogic 2300

-   Qlogic 2312

-   PTI SBS470

-   Antares P-0033

Controllers supported by the amd(4) driver include:

-   MELCO IFC-DP (PC-98)

-   Tekram DC390

-   Tekram DC390T

Controllers supported by the nsp(4) driver include:

-   Alpha-Data AD-PCS201

-   I-O DATA CBSC16

The following controllers are supported by the mpt(4) driver:

-   LSI Logic 53c1030 (Dual Ultra320 SCSI)

-   LSI Logic FC909 (1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC909A (Dual 1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC919 (2Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC929 (Dual 2Gb/s Fibre Channel)

The SCSI controller chips supprted by the mpt(4) driver can be found
onboard on many systems including:

-   Dell PowerEdge 1750

-   IBM eServer xSeries 335

Mit allen unterstützten SCSI Controllern ist die uneingeschränkte
Nutzung von SCSI-I, SCSI-II und SCSI-III Geräten möglich. Dazu gehören
Festplatten, optische Platten, Bandlaufwerke (u.a. DAT, 8mm Exabyte,
Mammoth, DLT), Wechselplatten, Geräte mit eigenem Prozessor und CDROM.
Sie können mit den CD-Treibern (wie cd(4)) lesend auf WORMs zugreifen,
wenn diese die entsprechenden Kommandos für CDROM unterstützen. Für
schreibenden Zugriff steht das Programm cdrecord(1) aus der Ports
Collection zur Verfügung.

Zur Zeit unterstützte CDROM-Arten:

-   SCSI Geräte (dazu gehören auch ProAudio Spectrum und SoundBlaster
    SCSI) (cd(4))

-   ATAPI IDE Geräte ( acd(4))

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.2. Netzwerkkarten

Adapters supported by the sf(4) driver include:

-   ANA-62011 64-bit single port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62022 64-bit dual port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62044 64-bit quad port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-69011 32-bit single port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62020 64-bit single port 100baseFX adapter

The ti(4) driver supports Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the Alteon
Tigon I and II chips. The ti(4) driver has been tested with the
following adapters:

-   3Com 3c985-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter (Tigon 1)

-   3Com 3c985B-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter (Tigon 2)

-   Alteon AceNIC V Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseSX)

-   Alteon AceNIC V Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseT)

-   Digital EtherWORKS 1000SX PCI Gigabit adapter

-   Netgear GA620 Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseSX)

-   Netgear GA620T Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseT)

The following adapters should also be supported but have not yet been
tested:

-   Asante GigaNIX1000T Gigabit Ethernet adapter

-   Asante PCI 1000BASE-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter

-   Farallon PN9000SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter

-   NEC Gigabit Ethernet

-   Silicon Graphics PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapter

The pcn(4) driver supports adapters and embedded controllers based on
the AMD PCnet/FAST, PCnet/FAST+, PCnet/FAST III, PCnet/PRO and
PCnet/Home Fast Ethernet chips:

-   AMD Am53C974/Am79C970/Am79C974 PCnet-PCI

-   AMD Am79C970A PCnet-PCI II

-   AMD Am79C971 PCnet-FAST

-   AMD Am79C972 PCnet-FAST+

-   AMD Am79C973/Am79C975 PCnet-FAST III

-   AMD Am79C976 PCnet-PRO

-   AMD PCnet/Home HomePNA

-   Allied-Telesis LA-PCI

-   Contec C-NET(98)S (PC-98)

-   NEC SV-98/2-B05, B06

The lnc(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Novell NE2100

-   Novell NE32-VL

-   Isolan AT 4141-0 (16 bit)

-   Isolan BICC

-   Isolink 4110 (8 bit)

-   Diamond HomeFree

-   Digital DEPCA

-   Hewlett Packard Vectra 486/66XM

-   Hewlett Packard Vectra XU

Also supported are adapters working with the pcn(4) driver. The lnc(4)
driver runs these in compatibility mode, thus the pcn(4) driver should
be preferred.

Netzwerkkarten mit SMC 83c17x (EPIC) (tx(4) Treiber)

The ed(4) driver supports the following Ethernet NICs:

-   3Com 3c503 Etherlink II

-   AR-P500 Ethernet

-   Accton EN1644 (old model), EN1646 (old model), EN2203 (old model)
    (110pin) (flags 0xd00000)

-   Accton EN2212/EN2216/UE2216

-   Allied Telesis CentreCOM LA100-PCM_V2

-   Allied Telesis LA-98 (flags 0x000000) (PC-98)

-   Allied Telesis SIC-98, SIC-98NOTE (110pin), SIU-98 (flags 0x600000)
    (PC-98)

-   Allied Telesis SIU-98-D (flags 0x610000) (PC-98)

-   AmbiCom 10BaseT card

-   Bay Networks NETGEAR FA410TXC Fast Ethernet

-   CNet BC40 adapter

-   Compex Net-A adapter

-   Contec C-NET(98), RT-1007(98), C-NET(9N) (110pin) (flags 0xa00000)
    (PC-98)

-   Contec C-NET(98)E-A, C-NET(98)L-A, C-NET(98)P (flags 0x300000)
    (PC-98)

-   Corega Ether98-T (flags 0x000000) (PC-98)

-   Corega Ether PCC-T/EtherII PCC-T/FEther PCC-TXF/PCC-TXD

-   CyQ've ELA-010

-   DEC EtherWorks DE305

-   Danpex EN-6200P2

-   D-Link DE-298, DE-298P (flags 0x500000) (PC-98)

-   D-Link DE-650/660

-   D-Link IC-CARD/IC-CARD+ Ethernet

-   ELECOM LD-98P (flags 0x500000) (PC-98)

-   ELECOM LD-BDN, LD-NW801G (flags 0x200000) (PC-98)

-   ELECOM Laneed LD-CDL/TX, LD-CDF, LD-CDS, LD-10/100CD, LD-CDWA
    (DP83902A)

-   HP PC Lan+ 27247B and 27252A

-   IBM Creditcard Ethernet I/II

-   ICM AD-ET2-T, DT-ET-25, DT-ET-T5, IF-2766ET, IF-2771ET, NB-ET-T
    (110pin) (flags 0x500000) (PC-98)

-   I-O DATA LA/T-98, LA/T-98SB, LA2/T-98, ET/T-98 (flags 0x900000)
    (PC-98)

-   I-O DATA ET2/T-PCI

-   I-O DATA PCLATE

-   Kansai KLA-98C/T (flags 0x900000) (PC-98)

-   Kingston KNE-PC2, KNE-PCM/x Ethernet

-   Linksys EC2T/PCMPC100/PCM100, PCMLM56

-   Linksys EtherFast 10/100 PC Card, Combo PCMCIA Ethernet Card
    (PCMPC100 V2)

-   Logitec LAN-98T (flags 0xb00000) (PC-98)

-   MACNICA Ethernet ME1 for JEIDA

-   MACNICA ME98 (flags 0x900000) (PC-98)

-   MACNICA NE2098 (flags 0x400000) (PC-98)

-   MELCO EGY-98 (flags 0x300000) (PC-98)

-   MELCO LGH-98, LGY-98, LGY-98-N (110pin), IND-SP, IND-SS (flags
    0x400000) (PC-98)

-   MELCO LGY-PCI-TR

-   MELCO LPC-T/LPC2-T/LPC2-CLT/LPC2-TX/LPC3-TX/LPC3-CLX

-   NDC Ethernet Instant-Link

-   NEC PC-9801-77, PC-9801-78 (flags 0x910000) (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9801-107, PC-9801-108 (flags 0x800000) (PC-98)

-   National Semiconductor InfoMover NE4100

-   NetGear FA-410TX

-   NetVin 5000

-   Network Everywhere Ethernet 10BaseT PC Card

-   Networld 98X3 (flags 0xd00000) (PC-98)

-   Networld EC-98X, EP-98X (flags 0xd10000) (PC-98)

-   Novell NE1000/NE2000/NE2100

-   PLANEX ENW-8300-T

-   PLANEX EN-2298-C (flags 0x200000) (PC-98)

-   PLANEX EN-2298P-T, EN-2298-T (flags 0x500000) (PC-98)

-   PLANEX FNW-3600-T

-   RealTek 8029

-   SMC Elite 16 WD8013

-   SMC Elite Ultra

-   SMC EtherEZ98 (flags 0x000000) (PC-98)

-   SMC WD8003E/WD8003EBT/WD8003S/WD8003SBT/WD8003W/WD8013EBT/WD8013W
    and clones

-   Socket LP-E

-   Surecom EtherPerfect EP-427

-   Surecom NE-34

-   TDK LAK-CD031, Grey Cell GCS2000 Ethernet Card

-   Telecom Device SuperSocket RE450T

-   VIA VT86C926

-   Winbond W89C940

C-Bus, ISA, PCI and PC Card devices are supported.

Adapters supported by the rl(4) driver include:

-   Accton ``Cheetah'' EN1207D (MPX 5030/5038; RealTek 8139 clone)

-   Allied Telesyn AT2550

-   Allied Telesyn AT2500TX

-   Belkin F5D5000

-   BUFFALO(Melco INC.) LPC-CB-CLX(CardBus)

-   Compaq HNE-300

-   CompUSA no-name 10/100 PCI Ethernet NIC

-   Corega FEther CB-TXD

-   Corega FEtherII CB-TXD

-   D-Link DFE-530TX+

-   D-Link DFE-538TX (same as 530+?)

-   D-Link DFE-690TXD

-   Edimax EP-4103DL CardBus

-   Encore ENL832-TX 10/100 M PCI

-   Farallon NetLINE 10/100 PCI

-   Genius GF100TXR,

-   GigaFast Ethernet EE100-AXP

-   KTX-9130TX 10/100 Fast Ethernet

-   LevelOne FPC-0106TX

-   Longshine LCS-8038TX-R

-   NDC Communications NE100TX-E

-   Netronix Inc. EA-1210 NetEther 10/100

-   Nortel Networks 10/100BaseTX

-   OvisLink LEF-8129TX

-   OvisLink LEF-8139TX

-   Peppercon AG ROL-F

-   Planex FNW-3800-TX

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 PCI 1211-TX

-   SOHO(PRAGMATIC) UE-1211C

The wb(4) driver supports Winbond W89C840F based Fast Ethernet adapters
and embedded controllers including:

-   Trendware TE100-PCIE

The vr(4) driver supports VIA Technologies Rhine I, Rhine II, and Rhine
III based Fast Ethernet adapters including:

-   D-Link DFE530-TX

-   Hawking Technologies PN102TX

-   AOpen/Acer ALN-320

The sis(4) driver supports Silicon Integrated Systems SiS 900 and SiS
7016 based Fast Ethernet adapters and embedded controllers, as well as
Fast Ethernet adapters based on the National Semiconductor DP83815
(MacPhyter) chip. Supported adapters include:

-   @Nifty FNECHARD IFC USUP-TX

-   MELCO LGY-PCI-TXC

-   Netgear FA311-TX (DP83815)

-   Netgear FA312-TX (DP83815)

-   SiS 630, 635, and 735 motherboard chipsets

The nge(4) driver supports National Semiconductor DP83820 and DP83821
based Gigabit Ethernet adapters including:

-   SMC EZ Card 1000 (SMC9462TX)

-   D-Link DGE-500T

-   Asante FriendlyNet GigaNIX 1000TA and 1000TPC

-   Addtron AEG320T

-   LinkSys EG1032 (32-bit PCI) and EG1064 (64-bit PCI)

-   Surecom Technology EP-320G-TX

-   Netgear GA622T

-   Netgear GA621

-   Ark PC SOHO-GA2500T (32-bit PCI) and SOHO-GA2000T (64-bit PCI)

-   Trendware TEG-PCITX (32-bit PCI) and TEG-PCITX2 (64-bit PCI)

The ste(4) driver supports Sundance Technologies ST201 based Fast
Ethernet adapters and embedded controllers including:

-   D-Link DFE-530TXS

-   D-Link DFE-550TX

-   D-Link DFE-580TX

Adapters supported by the sk(4) driver include:

-   3COM 3C940 single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   Belkin F5D5005 single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   Linksys EG1032 single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9521 SK-NET GE-T single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9821 SK-NET GE-T single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9822 SK-NET GE-T dual port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9841 SK-NET GE-LX single port, single mode fiber adapter

-   SK-9842 SK-NET GE-LX dual port, single mode fiber adapter

-   SK-9843 SK-NET GE-SX single port, multimode fiber adapter

-   SK-9844 SK-NET GE-SX dual port, multimode fiber adapter

-   SMC 9452TX single port, 1000baseT adapter

The tl(4) driver supports Texas Instruments ThunderLAN based Ethernet
and Fast Ethernet adapters including a large number of Compaq PCI
Ethernet adapters. Also supported are:

-   Olicom OC-2135/2138 10/100 TX UTP adapter

-   Olicom OC-2325/OC-2326 10/100 TX UTP adapter

-   Racore 8148 10baseT/100baseTX/100baseFX adapter

-   Racore 8165 10/100baseTX adapter

The tl(4) driver also supports the built-in Ethernet adapters of various
Compaq Prosignia servers and Compaq Deskpro desktop machines including:

-   Compaq Netelligent 10

-   Compaq Netelligent 10 T PCI UTP/Coax

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 Dual-Port

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 Proliant

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 TX Embedded UTP

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 TX UTP

-   Compaq NetFlex 3P

-   Compaq NetFlex 3P Integrated

-   Compaq NetFlex 3P w/BNC

The dc(4) driver provides support for the following chipsets:

-   DEC/Intel 21143

-   ADMtek AL981 Comet, AN985 Centaur, ADM9511 Centaur II and ADM9513
    Centaur II

-   ASIX Electronics AX88140A and AX88141

-   Conexant LANfinity RS7112 (miniPCI)

-   Davicom DM9009, DM9100, DM9102 and DM9102A

-   Lite-On 82c168 and 82c169 PNIC

-   Lite-On/Macronix 82c115 PNIC II

-   Macronix 98713, 98713A, 98715, 98715A, 98715AEC-C, 98725, 98727 and
    98732

-   Xircom X3201 (cardbus only)

The following NICs are known to work with the dc(4) driver at this time:

-   3Com OfficeConnect 10/100B (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Abocom FE2500

-   Accton EN1217 (98715A)

-   Accton EN2242 MiniPCI

-   Adico AE310TX (98715A)

-   Alfa Inc GFC2204 (ASIX AX88140A)

-   Built in 10Mbps only Ethernet on Compaq Presario 7900 series
    desktops (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in DE500-BA on DEC Alpha workstations (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in Sun DMFE 10/100 Mbps Ethernet on Sun Netra X1 and Sun Fire
    V100 (DM9102A, MII)

-   Built in Ethernet on LinkSys EtherFast 10/100 Instant GigaDrive
    (DM9102, MII)

-   CNet Pro110B (ASIX AX88140A)

-   CNet Pro120A (98715A or 98713A) and CNet Pro120B (98715)

-   Compex RL100-TX (98713 or 98713A)

-   D-Link DFE-570TX (21143, MII, quad port)

-   Digital DE500-BA 10/100 (21143, non-MII)

-   ELECOM Laneed LD-CBL/TXA (ADMtek AN985)

-   Hawking CB102 CardBus

-   IBM EtherJet Cardbus Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 Mobile Cardbus (versions that use the X3201 chipset)

-   Jaton XpressNet (Davicom DM9102)

-   Kingston KNE100TX (21143, MII)

-   Kingston KNE110TX (PNIC 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v2.0 (PNIC II 82c115)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v4.0/4.1 (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Matrox FastNIC 10/100 (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   Melco LGY-PCI-TXL

-   Microsoft MN-120 10/100 CardBus (ADMTek Centaur-C)

-   Microsoft MN-130 10/100 PCI (ADMTek Centaur-P)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A (98713A)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A Rev B4 (98715AEC-C)

-   NetGear FA310-TX Rev. D1, D2 or D3 (PNIC 82c169)

-   Netgear FA511

-   PlaneX FNW-3602-T (ADMtek AN985)

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 1233A-TX (ADMtek AN985)

-   SVEC PN102-TX (98713)

-   Xircom Cardbus Realport

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet 10/100

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet II 10/100

Adapters supported by the aue(4) driver include:

-   Abocom UFE1000, DSB650TX_NA

-   Accton USB320-EC, SpeedStream

-   ADMtek AN986, AN8511

-   Billionton USB100, USB100LP, USB100EL, USBE100

-   Corega Ether FEther USB-T, FEther USB-TX, FEther USB-TXS

-   D-Link DSB-650, DSB-650TX, DSB-650TX-PNA

-   Elecom LD-USBL/TX

-   Elsa Microlink USB2Ethernet

-   HP hn210e

-   I-O Data USB ETTX

-   Kingston KNU101TX

-   LinkSys USB10T adapters that contain the AN986 Pegasus chipset,
    USB10TA, USB10TX, USB100TX, USB100H1

-   MELCO LUA-TX, LUA2-TX

-   Planex UE-200TX

-   Sandberg USB to Network Link (model number 133-06)

-   Siemens Speedstream

-   SmartBridges smartNIC

-   SMC 2202USB

-   SOHOware NUB100

The cue(4) driver supports CATC USB-EL1210A based USB Ethernet adapters
including:

-   Belkin F5U011/F5U111

-   CATC Netmate

-   CATC Netmate II

-   SmartBridges SmartLink

The kue(4) driver supports Kawasaki LSI KL5KLUSB101B based USB Ethernet
adapters including:

-   3Com 3c19250

-   3Com 3c460 HomeConnect Ethernet USB Adapter

-   ADS Technologies USB-10BT

-   AOX USB101

-   ATen UC10T

-   Abocom URE 450

-   Corega USB-T

-   D-Link DSB-650C

-   Entrega NET-USB-E45, NET-HUB-3U1E

-   I/O Data USB ETT

-   Kawasaki DU-H3E

-   LinkSys USB10T

-   Netgear EA101

-   Peracom USB Ethernet Adapter

-   SMC 2102USB, 2104USB

The axe(4) driver supports ASIX Electronics AX88172 based USB Ethernet
adapters including:

-   Buffalo (Melco Inc.) LUA-U2-KTX

-   D-Link DUBE100

-   LinkSys USB200M

-   Netgear FA120

-   System TALKS Inc. SGC-X2UL

The rue(4) driver supports RealTek RTL8150 based USB Ethernet adapters
including:

-   Buffalo (Melco Inc.) LUA-KTX

-   Green House GH-USB100B

-   LinkSys USB100M

-   Billionton 10/100 FastEthernet USBKR2

The udav(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Corega FEther USB-TXC

Adapters supported by the de(4) driver include:

-   Adaptec ANA-6944/TX

-   Cogent EM100FX and EM440TX

-   Corega FastEther PCI-TX

-   D-Link DFE-500TX

-   DEC DE435, DE425, DEC DE450, and DEC DE500

-   ELECOM LD-PCI2T, LD-PCITS

-   I-O DATA LA2/T-PCI

-   SMC Etherpower 8432, 9332 and 9334

-   ZNYX ZX3xx

Controllers and cards supported by the fe(4) driver include:

-   Allied Telesis RE1000, RE1000Plus, ME1500 (110-pin)

-   CONTEC C-NET(98)P2, C-NET (9N)E (110-pin), C-NET(9N)C (ExtCard)

-   CONTEC C-NET(PC)C PCMCIA Ethernet

-   Eiger Labs EPX-10BT

-   Fujitsu FMV-J182, FMV-J182A

-   Fujitsu MB86960A, MB86965A

-   Fujitsu MBH10303, MBH10302 Ethernet PCMCIA

-   Fujitsu Towa LA501 Ethernet

-   HITACHI HT-4840-11

-   NextCom J Link NC5310

-   RATOC REX-5588, REX-9822, REX-4886, and REX-R280

-   RATOC REX-9880/9881/9882/9883

-   TDK LAC-98012, LAC-98013, LAC-98025, LAC-9N011 (110-pin)

-   TDK LAK-CD021, LAK-CD021A, LAK-CD021BX

-   Ungermann-Bass Access/PC N98C+(PC85152, PC85142), Access/NOTE
    N98(PC86132) (110-pin)

Adapters supported by the fxp(4) driver include:

-   Intel EtherExpress PRO/10

-   Intel InBusiness 10/100

-   Intel PRO/100B / EtherExpressPRO/100 B PCI Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100+ Management Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 VE Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 M Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 S Desktop, Server and Dual-Port Server Adapters

-   Contec C-NET(PI)-100TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821Ra20, Rv20, Xv13, Xv20 internal 100Base-TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B06 (PC-98)

-   Many on-board network interfaces on Intel motherboards

The ep(4) driver supports Ethernet adapters based on the 3Com 3C5x9
Etherlink III Parallel Tasking chipset, including:

-   3Com 3C1 CF

-   3Com 3C509-TP, 3C509-BNC, 3C509-Combo, 3C509-TPO, 3C509-TPC ISA

-   3Com 3C509B-TP, 3C509B-BNC, 3C509B-Combo, 3C509B-TPO, 3C509B-TPC ISA

-   3Com 3C529, 3C529-TP MCA

-   3Com 3C562/3C563 PCMCIA

-   3Com 3C569B-J-TPO, 3C569B-J-COMBO CBUS

-   3Com 3C574-TX, 3CCFE574BT, 3CXFE574BT, 3C3FE574BT PCMCIA

-   3Com 3C579-TP, 3C579-BNC EISA

-   3Com 3C589, 3C589B, 3C589C, 3C589D, 3CXE589DT PCMCIA

-   3Com 3CCFEM556B, 3CCFEM556BI PCMCIA

-   3Com 3CXE589EC, 3CCE589EC, 3CXE589ET, 3CCE589ET PCMCIA

-   3Com Megahertz 3CCEM556, 3CXEM556, 3CCEM556B, 3CXEM556B PCMCIA

-   3Com OfficeConnect 3CXSH572BT, 3CCSH572BT PCMCIA

-   Farallon EtherMac PCMCIA

The xl(4) driver supports the following hardware:

-   3Com 3c900-TPO

-   3Com 3c900-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905-TX

-   3Com 3c905-T4

-   3Com 3c900B-TPO

-   3Com 3c900B-TPC

-   3Com 3c900B-FL

-   3Com 3c900B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905B-T4

-   3Com 3c905B-TX

-   3Com 3c905B-FX

-   3Com 3c905B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905C-TX

-   3Com 3c980, 3c980B, and 3c980C server adapters

-   3Com 3cSOHO100-TX OfficeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c450 HomeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c555, 3c556 and 3c556B mini-PCI adapters

-   3Com 3C3SH573BT, 3C575TX, 3CCFE575BT, 3CXFE575BT, 3CCFE575CT,
    3CXFE575CT, 3CCFEM656, 3CCFEM656B, and 3CCFEM656C, 3CXFEM656,
    3CXFEM656B, and 3CXFEM656C CardBus adapters

-   3Com 3c905-TX, 3c905B-TX 3c905C-TX, and 3c920B-EMB embedded adapters

Both the 3C656 family of CardBus cards and the 3C556 family of MiniPCI
cards have a built-in proprietary modem. Neither the xl(4) driver nor
any other driver supports this modem.

The vx(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   3Com 3c590 EtherLink III PCI

-   3Com 3c592 EtherLink III EISA

-   3Com 3c595 Fast EtherLink III PCI in 10 Mbps mode

-   3Com 3c597 Fast EtherLink III EISA in 10 Mbps mode

The snc(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   National Semiconductor DP83934AVQB

-   NEC PC-9801-83

-   NEC PC-9801-84

-   NEC PC-9801-103

-   NEC PC-9801-104

-   NEC PC-9801N-15

-   NEC PC-9801N-25

-   NEC PC-9801N-J02 PCMCIA

-   NEC PC-9801N-J02R PCMCIA

The snc(4) driver also includes support for the National Semiconductor
NS46C46 as 64 * 16 bits Microwave Serial EEPROM.

Adapters supported by the lge(4) driver include:

-   SMC TigerCard 1000 (SMC9462SX)

-   D-Link DGE-500SX

The txp(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   3Com 3CR990-TX-95

-   3Com 3CR990-TX-97

-   3Com 3cR990B-TXM

-   3Com 3CR990SVR95

-   3Com 3CR990SVR97

-   3Com 3cR990B-SRV

The bge(4) driver provides support for various NICs based on the
Broadcom BCM570x family of Gigabit Ethernet controller chips, including
the following:

-   3Com 3c996-T (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Dell PowerEdge 1750 integrated BCM5704C NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Dell PowerEdge 2550 integrated BCM5700 NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Dell PowerEdge 2650 integrated BCM5703 NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   IBM x235 server integrated BCM5703x NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP ProLiant NC7760 embedded Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP ProLiant NC7770 PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP ProLiant NC7781 embedded PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Netgear GA302T (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   SysKonnect SK-9D21 (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   SysKonnect SK-9D41 (1000baseSX)

The em(4) driver supports Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the Intel
82540, 82541PI, 82542, 82543, 82544, 82546, 82546EB and 82547 controller
chips:

-   Intel PRO/1000 CT Network Connection (82547)

-   Intel PRO/1000 F Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 Gigabit Server Adapter (82542)

-   Intel PRO/1000 GT Desktop Adapter (82541PI)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Dual Port Server Adapter (82546)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Server Adapter (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Server Adapter (LX) (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Desktop Adapter (82540)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Desktop Adapter (82541)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Dual Port Server Adapter (82546)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Quad Port Server Adapter (82546EB)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Server Adapter (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Desktop Adapter (82544)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 XF Server Adapter (82544)

-   Intel PRO/1000 XT Server Adapter (82544)

The gx(4) driver supports Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the Intel
82542 and 82543 controller chips:

-   Intel PRO/1000 Gigabit Server Adapter (82542)

-   Intel PRO/1000 F Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Server Adapter (82543)

The hme(4) driver supports the on-board Ethernet interfaces of many Sun
UltraSPARC workstation and server models. Cards supported by the hme(4)
driver include:

-   Sun PCI SunSwift Adapter

-   Sun SBus SunSwift Adapter ``( hme'' and ``SUNW,hme'')

-   Sun PCI Sun100BaseT Adapter 2.0

-   Sun SBus Sun100BaseT 2.0

-   Sun PCI Quad FastEthernet Controller

-   Sun SBus Quad FastEthernet Controller

The my(4) driver provides support for various NICs based on the Myson
chipset. Supported models include:

-   Myson MTD800 PCI Fast Ethernet chip

-   Myson MTD803 PCI Fast Ethernet chip

-   Myson MTD89X PCI Gigabit Ethernet chip

The re(4) driver supports RealTek RTL8139C+, RTL8169, RTL8169S and
RTL8110S based Fast Ethernet and Gigabit Ethernet adapters including:

-   Alloy Computer Products EtherGOLD 1439E 10/100 (8139C+)

-   Compaq Evo N1015v Integrated Ethernet (8139C+)

-   Corega CG-LAPCIGT Gigabit Ethernet (8169S)

-   Gigabyte 7N400 Pro2 Integrated Gigabit Ethernet (8110S)

-   PLANEX COMMUNICATIONS Inc. GN-1200TC (8169S)

-   Xterasys XN-152 10/100/1000 NIC (8169)

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.3. FDDI Karten

DEC DEFPA PCI ( fpa(4) Treiber)

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.4. ATM Karten

ATM Karten auf Midway-Basis (en(4) Treiber)

FORE Systems, Inc. PCA-200E ATM PCI Karten (hfa und fatm(4) Treiber)

ATM Karten mit IDT 77201/211 ( idt(4) Treiber)

FORE Systems, Inc. HE155 und HE622 ATM Karten ( hatm(4) Karten)

ATM-Karten auf Basis des IDT77252 Chipsatzes ( patm(4) Treiber)

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.5. Karten für drahtlose Netzwerke

Lucent Technologies WaveLAN/IEEE 802.11b Wireless Ethernet Karten und
kompatible auf Basis der Hermes, Intersil PRISM-II, Intersil PRISM-2.5,
Intersil Prism-3 und Symbol Spectrum24 Chipsätze (wi(4) driver)

Cisco/Aironet 802.11b Wireless Karten (an(4) Treiber)

Raytheon Raylink 2.4GHz Wireless Karten ( ray(4) Treiber)

Cards supported by the awi(4) driver include:

-   BayStack 650

-   BayStack 660

-   Icom SL-200

-   Melco WLI-PCM

-   NEL SSMagic

-   Netwave AirSurfer Plus

-   Netwave AirSurfer Pro

-   Nokia C020 WLAN

-   Farallon SkyLINE

The original Xircom Netwave AirSurfer is supported by the cnw(4) driver.

Cards supported by the cnw(4) driver include:

-   Xircom CreditCard Netwave

-   NetWave AirSurfer

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.6. Diverse Netzwerkkarten

The cp(4) driver supports the following models of Tau-PCI WAN adapters:

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI/R

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-E1

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-G703

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-2E1

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-4E1

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-E3

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-T3

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-STS1

<<<<<<< HEAD

3.7. ISDN Karten

=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.7. ISDN Karten

------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.8. Serielle Schnittstellen

Eingebaute Serielle Schnittstellen ( sio(4) Treiber)

-   PC-9801 on-board

-   PC-9821 2'nd CCU (flags 0x12000000)

NEC PC-9861K, PC-9801-101 und Midori-Denshi MDC-926Rs ( sio(4) Treiber)

-   COM2 (Flags 0x01000000)

-   COM3 (Flags 0x02000000)

NEC PC-9801-120 ( sio(4) Treiber)

  Anmerkung: "flags 0x11000000" muß in der Konfigurationsdatei angegeben
  werden.

Microcore MC-16550, MC-16550II, MC-RS98 ( sio(4) Treiber)

  Anmerkung: "flags 0x14000?01" muß in der Konfigurationsdatei angegeben
  werden.

Media Intelligent RSB-2000, RSB-3000 und AIWA B98-02 ( sio(4) Treiber)

  Anmerkung: "flags 0x15000?01" muß in der Konfigurationsdatei angegeben
  werden.

Media Intelligent RSB-384 ( sio(4) Treiber)

  Anmerkung: "flags 0x16000001" muß in der Konfigurationsdatei angegeben
  werden.

I-O DATA RSA-98III ( sio(4) Treiber)

  Anmerkung: "flags 0x18000?01" muß in der Konfigurationsdatei angegeben
  werden.

Hayes ESP98 ( sio(4) Treiber)

  Anmerkung: "options COM_ESP" und "flags 0x19000000" müssen in der
  Konfigurationsdatei angegeben werden.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.9. Audio Hardware

The snd_ess(4) driver supports the following soundcards:

-   Ensoniq ESS ISA PnP/non-PnP

NEC PC-9801-73, 86 und Kompatible (nss Treiber)

-   NEC A-MATE on-board Audio

-   Q-Vision WaveStar, WaveMaster

NEC X-MATE, CanBe, ValueStar on-board (mss Treiber)

Creative Technologies SoundBlaster(98) (sb(4) Treiber)

I-O DATA CD-BOX (sb(4) Treiber)

MPU-401 und kompatible (mpu Treiber)

-   Q-Vision WaveStar

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.10. Kameras, TV-Karten, etc

Karten mit Brooktree Bt848/849/878/879 ( bktr(4) Treiber)

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.11. USB Geräte

FreeBSD unterstützt viele verschiedene Arten von USB-Geräten; in den
nachfolgenden Listen sind nur die Geräte aufgeführt, für die wir
Erfolgsmeldungen erhalten haben. Da sich die meisten USB-Geräte sehr
ähnlich sind, werden üblicherweise alle Geräte einer Klasse
funktionieren, auch wenn Sie hier nicht explizit aufgeführt sind.
Ausnahmen bestätigen allerdings immer die Regel.

  Anmerkung: USB Netzwerkkarten finden Sie in einem eigenen Abschnitt im
  Kapitel Netzwerkkarten.

  Anmerkung: Bluetooth-Adapter für USB finden Sie in im Abschnitt
  Bluetooth.

The ohci(4) driver supports all OHCI v1.0 compliant controllers
including:

-   AcerLabs M5237 (Aladdin-V)

-   AMD-756

-   OPTi 82C861 (FireLink)

-   NEC uPD 9210

-   CMD Tech 670 (USB0670)

-   CMD Tech 673 (USB0673)

-   NVIDIA nForce3

The uhci(4) driver supports all UHCI v1.1 compliant controllers
including:

-   Intel 82371AB/EB (PIIX4)

-   Intel 82371SB (PIIX3)

-   VIA 83C572

USB 2.0 Controller, die das EHCI Interface nutzen ( ehci(4) Treiber)

Hubs

Tastaturen ( ukbd(4) Treiber)

Diverses

-   Assist Computer Systems PC Camera C-M1

-   ActiveWire I/O Board

-   Creative Technology Video Blaster WebCam Plus

-   D-Link DSB-R100 USB Radio ( ufm(4) Treiber)

-   Mirunet AlphaCam Plus

The following devices are supported by the urio(4) driver:

-   Diamond MultiMedia Rio 500

-   Diamond MultiMedia Rio 600

-   Diamond MultiMedia Rio 800

Devices supported by the umodem(4) driver include:

-   3Com 5605

-   Metricom Ricochet GS USB wireless modem

-   Yamaha Broadband Wireless Router RTW65b

Mäuse ( ums(4) Treiber)

The ulpt(4) driver provides support for USB printers and parallel
printer conversion cables, including the following:

-   ATen parallel printer adapter

-   Belkin F5U002 parallel printer adapter

-   Canon BJ F850, S600

-   Canon LBP-1310, 350

-   Entrega USB-to-parallel printer adapter

-   Hewlett-Packard HP Deskjet 3420 (P/N: C8947A #ABJ)

-   Oki Data MICROLINE ML660PS

-   Seiko Epson PM-900C, 880C, 820C, 730C

The ubsa(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Belkin F5U103

-   Belkin F5U120

-   e-Tek Labs Kwik232

-   GoHubs GoCOM232

-   Peracom single port serial adapter

The ubser(4) driver provides support the BWCT console management serial
adapters.

The uftdi(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   HP USB-Serial adapter shipped with some HP laptops

-   Inland UAS111

-   QVS USC-1000

The uplcom(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   ATEN UC-232A

-   BAFO BF-800

-   BAFO BF-810

-   ELECOM UC-SGT

-   HAL Corporation Crossam2+USB IR commander

-   IOGEAR UC-232A

-   I/O DATA USB-RSAQ

-   I/O DATA USB-RSAQ2

-   PLANEX USB-RS232 URS-03

-   RATOC REX-USB60

-   Sandberg USB to Serial Link (model number 133-08)

-   SOURCENEXT KeikaiDenwa 8 (with and without charger)

-   Sony Ericsson USB Cable (Susteen USB Data Cable)

The umct(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Magic Control Technology USB-232

-   Sitecom USB-232

-   D-Link DU-H3SP USB BAY Hub

-   Belkin F5U109

-   Belkin F5U409

The following devices are supported by the uscanner(4) driver:

-   Acer Acerscan 320U

-   Acer Acerscan 620U

-   Acer Acerscan 640U

-   Acer Acerscan C310U

-   AGFA SnapScan 1212U

-   AGFA SnapScan 1236U

-   AGFA SnapScan e20

-   AGFA SnapScan e25

-   AGFA SnapScan e26

-   AGFA SnapScan e40

-   AGFA SnapScan e50

-   AGFA SnapScan e52

-   AGFA SnapScan Touch

-   Avision 1200U

-   Canon CanoScan N656U

-   Canon CanoScan N676U

-   Canon CanoScan N1220U

-   Canon CanoScan LIDE 20

-   Canon CanoScan LIDE 30

-   Epson Perfection 610

-   Epson Perfection 636U / 636Photo

-   Epson Perfection 640U

-   Epson Perfection 1200U / 1200Photo

-   Epson Perfection 1240U / 1240Photo

-   Epson Perfection 1250

-   Epson Perfection 1260

-   Epson Expression 1600

-   Epson Perfection 1640SU

-   Epson Perfection 1650

-   Epson Perfection 1660

-   Epson Perfection 1670

-   Epson Perfection 3200

-   Epson GT-8400UF

-   Epson GT-9300UF

-   Epson GT-9700F

-   Hewlett Packard Photosmart S20

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 2200C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 3300C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 3400CSE

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 4100C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 4200C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 4300C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 5200C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 5300C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 5400C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 6200C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 6300C

-   KYE ColorPage Vivid-Pro

-   Microtek Phantom 336CX

-   Microtek Phantom C6

-   Microtek ScanMaker V6UL

-   Microtek ScanMaker V6USL

-   Microtek ScanMaker X6U

-   Minolta 5400

-   Mustek 600 CU

-   Mustek 1200 CU

-   Mustek 1200 UB

-   Mustek 1200 USB

-   Mustek BearPaw 1200F

-   Mustek BearPaw 1200TA

-   NatSemi BearPaw 1200

-   Nikon CoolScan LS40 ED

-   Primax 6200

-   Primax Colorado 1200u

-   Primax Colorado 600u

-   Primax Colorado USB 19200

-   Primax Colorado USB 9600

-   Primax G2-200

-   Primax G2-300

-   Primax G2-600

-   Primax G2600

-   Primax G2E-300

-   Primax G2E-3002

-   Primax G2E-600

-   Primax G2E600

-   Primax G2X-300

-   Primax G600

-   Primax ReadyScan 636i

-   Ultima 1200 UB Plus

-   UMAX Astra 1220U

-   UMAX Astra 1236U

-   UMAX Astra 2000U

-   UMAX Astra 2100U

-   UMAX Astra 2200U

-   UMAX Astra 3400

-   Visioneer OneTouch 3000

-   Visioneer OneTouch 5300

-   Visioneer OneTouch 7600

-   Visioneer OneTouch 6100

-   Visioneer OneTouch 6200

-   Visioneer OneTouch 8100

-   Visioneer OneTouch 8600

Massenspeicher ( umass(4) Treiber)

-   ADTEC Stick Drive AD-UST32M, 64M, 128M, 256M

-   Denno FireWire/USB2 Removable 2.5-inch HDD Case MIFU-25CB20

-   FujiFilm Zip USB Drive ZDR100 USB A

-   GREEN HOUSE USB Flash Memory ``PicoDrive'' GH-UFD32M, 64M, 128M

-   IBM 32MB USB Memory Key (P/N 22P5296)

-   IBM ThinkPad USB Portable CD-ROM Drive (P/N 33L5151)

-   I-O DATA USB x6 CD-RW Drive CDRW-i64/USB (nur CDROM

-   I-O DATA USB CD/CD-R/CD-RW/DVD-R/DVD-RW/DVD-RAM/DVD-ROM Laufwerk DV
    R-iUH2 (nur CDROM und DVD-RAM)

-   Iomega Zip750 USB2.0 Drive

-   Keian USB1.1/2.0 3.5-inch HDD Case KU350A

-   Kurouto Shikou USB 2.5-inch HDD Case GAWAP2.5PS-USB2.0

-   Logitec USB1.1/2.0 HDD Unit SHD-E60U2

-   Logitec Mobile USB Memory LMC-256UD

-   Logitec USB Double-Speed Diskettenlaufwerk LFD-31U2

-   Logitec USB/IEEE1394 DVD-RAM/R/RW Unit LDR-N21FU2 (nur CDROM)

-   Matshita CF-VFDU03 Diskettenlaufwerk

-   MELCO USB2.0 MO Drive MO-CH640U2

-   MELCO USB/IEEE1394 Portable HD Drive HDP-i30P/CI, HDP-i40P/CI

-   MELCO USB Flash Disk ``PetitDrive'', RUF-32M, -64M, -128M, -256M

-   MELCO USB2.0 Flash Disk ``PetitDrive2'', RUF-256M/U2, -512M/U2

-   MELCO USB Flash Disk ``ClipDrive'', RUF-C32M, -C64M, -C128M, -C256M,
    -C512M

-   Microtech USB-SCSI-HD 50 USB-auf-SCSI Kabel

-   Panasonic Diskettenlaufwerk

-   Panasonic USB2.0 Portable CD-RW Drive KXL-RW40AN (nur CDROM)

-   RATOC Systems USB2.0 Removable HDD Case U2-MDK1, U2-MDK1B

-   Sony Portable CD-R/RW Drive CRX10U (CDROM only)

-   TEAC Portable USB CD-ROM Unit CD-110PU/210PU

-   Y-E Data Diskettenlaufwerk (720/1.44/2.88Mb)

Audio Geräte ( uaudio(4) Treiber)

The uvisor(4) driver supports the following devices:

-   Handspring Treo

-   Handspring Treo 600

-   Handspring Visor

-   Palm I705

-   Palm M125

-   Palm M130

-   Palm M500

-   Palm M505

-   Palm M515

-   Palm Tungsten T

-   Palm Tungsten Z

-   Palm Zire

-   Palm Zire 31

-   Sony Clie 4.0

-   Sony Clie 4.1

-   Sony Clie 5.0

-   Sony Clie PEG-S500C

-   Sony Clie NX60

-   Sony Clie S360

<<<<<<< HEAD

3.12. IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Geräte

=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.12. IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Geräte

------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.13. Bluetooth Geräte

PCCARD Host Kontroller ( ng_bt3c(4) Treiber)

-   3Com/HP 3CRWB6096-A PCCARD Adapter

The ng_ubt(4) driver supports all Bluetooth USB devices that conform
with the Bluetooth specification v1.1, including:

-   3Com 3CREB96

-   AIPTEK BR0R02

-   EPoX BT-DG02

-   Mitsumi Bluetooth USB adapter

-   MSI MS-6967

-   TDK Bluetooth USB adapter

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.14. Verschlüsselungs-Hardware

The hifn(4) driver supports various cards containing the Hifn 7751,
7951, 7811, 7955, and 7956 chipsets, such as:

-   Invertex AEON

-   Hifn 7751

-   PowerCrypt

-   XL-Crypt

-   NetSec 7751

-   Soekris Engineering vpn1201 and vpn1211

-   Soekris Engineering vpn1401 and vpn1411

The safe(4) driver supports cards containing any of the following chips:

-   SafeNet 1141

-   SafeNet 1741

The ubsec(4) driver supports cards containing any of the following
chips:

-   Bluesteel 5501

-   Bluesteel 5601

-   Broadcom BCM5801

-   Broadcom BCM5802

-   Broadcom BCM5805

-   Broadcom BCM5820

-   Broadcom BCM5821

-   Broadcom BCM5822

-   Broadcom BCM5823

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.15. Diverses

FAX-Modem/PCCARD

-   MELCO IGM-PCM56K/IGM-PCM56KH

-   Nokia Card Phone 2.0 (gsm900/dcs1800 HSCSD terminal)

Diskettenlaufwerk ( fdc(4) Treiber)

Tastaturen:

-   Standard-Tastaturen

-   USB-Tastaturen (genaue Modellbezeichnungen finden Sie im Kapitel USB
    Geräte)

Mäuse:

-   Bus Mäuse und kompatible Geräte ( mse(4) Treiber)

-   serielle Mäse und kompatible Geräte

-   USB Mäuse (genaue Modellbezeichnungen finden im Kapitel USB Geräte)

  Anmerkung: In moused(8) finden Sie weitere Informationen zur Nutzung
  von Mäusen in FreeBSD. Informationen über die Nutzung von Mäusen in
  XFree86 erhalten Sie bei http://www.xfree86.org/.

Parallele Schnittstellen nach ``PC-9821 Standard'' ( ppc(4) Treiber)

Joystick Port des SoundBlaster(98) ( joy(4) Treiber)

PHS Data Communication Card/PCCARD

-   NTT DoCoMo P-in Comp@ct

-   Panasonic KX-PH405

-   SII MC-P200

Power Management Controller im NEC PC-98 Note (pmc Treiber)

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

Diese Datei und andere Dokumente zu dieser Version sind bei
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/verfuegbar.

Wenn Sie Fragen zu FreeBSD haben, lesen Sie erst die Dokumentation,
bevor Sie sich an <de-bsd-questions@de.FreeBSD.org> wenden.

Alle Anwender von FreeBSD 5-STABLE sollten sich in die Mailingliste
<stable@FreeBSD.org> eintragen.

Wenn Sie Fragen zu dieser Dokumentation haben, wenden Sie sich an
<de-bsd-translators@de.FreeBSD.org>.
