[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Performance Monitoring Counters

Contact: Mitchell Horne <mhorne@FreeBSD.org>

This quarter, some improvements were made to the pmc(3) library and
hwpmc(4) kernel module.

Background: Traditionally, PMC event codes have been defined manually in
the sys/dev/hwpmc/pmc_events.h header and compiled statically into the
kernel. These definitions provide a translation between an event’s name
and its encoding and are leveraged by PMC tools like pmcstat(8) via the
pmc(3) library. In 2018, a new source of truth for event definitions was
introduced for the amd64 and i386 architectures, which is the pmu-events
tables. These are a set of json files, maintained by the Linux kernel,
which are compiled directly into libpmc and provide a more complete set
of event definitions.

The main result of this work was porting the use of the pmu-events
definitions to arm64. Some minor refactoring to libpmc was performed,
making porting to other platforms in the future easier. A few small bugs
were found and fixed along the way; notably, the "instructions" alias
for pmcstat(8) should work again on Intel CPUs. The ability was added to
query the legacy event tables when pmu-events does not contain the
desired event, restoring the ability to use the pmc.soft(3) events on
x86. Finally, event definitions for newer AMD Zen3 CPUs were imported
(credits: Greg V).

An larger update of the PMU event definitions is planned for Q3 of 2021.
This will bring us in sync with 3 years of updates for x86 CPUs and
greatly increase the number of events available on arm64 platforms.

Those who make regular or occasional use of FreeBSD’s PMC tools are
encouraged to test their typical workflow and report any regressions.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: July 24, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
