[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

libglvnd on FreeBSD

Links:
libglvnd URL: https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/glvnd/libglvnd

Contact: Kevin Bowling <kbowling@FreeBSD.org>

libglvnd (GL Vendor-Neutral Dispatch) "is a vendor-neutral dispatch
layer for arbitrating OpenGL API calls between multiple vendors. It
allows multiple drivers from different vendors to coexist on the same
filesystem, and determines which vendor to dispatch each API call to at
runtime. Both GLX and EGL are supported, in any combination with OpenGL
and OpenGL ES."

Making this the default GL implementation in FreeBSD Ports unblocks a
number of efforts and aligns us with future graphics stacks.

It cleans up the ability to have multiple GL implementations on one
system or image, regardless of what hardware is in use, by eliminating
the need for one-or-the-other hard links for these libraries. This can
in turn be used by Nvidia Optimus setups, or using your fancy PCIe
interconnect to have multiple vendor GPUs for any reason. It will
support future Mesa releases where a concurrent LTS (Long Term Support)
branch install can be used to fill in drivers that will be removed from
newer Mesa releases.

Software like KDE and Firefox can use EGL contexts under X11 (with
OpenGL) and Wayland, and in the case of upcoming Firefox releases it may
match the speed of Google Chrome when doing so.

The library uses various implementation details to minimize any
performance impact from indirection, with platform specific support for
aarch64, amd64, armv7, i386, and powerpc64 (ELFv2).

Finally, it helps reduces over-linking with a new libOpenGL to provide
OpenGL without X11 for headless servers or kms or Wayland environments.

If there is any remaining fallout from this change please add kbowling@
to the PR watchers.

Thank you to Jan Beich <jbeich@FreeBSD.org> for doing the ports
infrastructure work and Matt Turner (Gentoo/freedesktop) for helping me
understand the architecture and how to handle this change in a
source-based distribution, as well as merging a change in libGLU
upstream to support building without X11 dependency.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: July 24, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
