[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/alpha 4.9-RELEASE Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/common/new.sgml,v
1.22.2.386 2003/10/19 18:33:34 bmah Exp $

The release notes for FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system since 4.8-RELEASE. Both changes
for kernel and userland are listed, as well as applicable security
advisories for the base system that were issued since the last release.
Some brief remarks on upgrading are also presented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 What's New

2.1 Security Advisories

2.2 Kernel Changes

2.2.1 Platform-Specific Hardware Support

2.2.2 Boot Loader Changes

2.2.3 Network Interface Support

2.2.4 Network Protocols

2.2.5 Disks and Storage

2.2.6 File Systems

2.2.7 PCCARD Support

2.2.8 Multimedia Support

2.3 Userland Changes

2.4 Contributed Software

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE on the
Alpha/AXP hardware platform. It describes new features of FreeBSD that
have been added (or changed) since 4.8-RELEASE. It also provides some
notes on upgrading from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/ or any of its mirrors. More
information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the ``Obtaining FreeBSD'' appendix in the
FreeBSD Handbook.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 What's New

This section describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 4.8-RELEASE. Typical release note items document new
drivers or hardware support, new commands or options, major bugfixes, or
contributed software upgrades. Security advisories for the base system
that were issued after 4.8-RELEASE are also listed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Security Advisories

A remotely-exploitable buffer overflow vulnerability in sendmail has
been fixed. For more details, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:07. In
FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE, this vulnerability was fixed using a
vendor-supplied patch (but too late for inclusion in the release notes).
In FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE, it has been fixed with the import of a new
version of sendmail.

A single-byte buffer overflow in realpath(3) has been fixed. See
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:08.

A bug that could allow the kernel to attempt delivery of invalid signals
has been fixed. The bug could have led to a kernel panic. For more
information, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:09.

A bug in the iBCS2 emulation module, which could result in disclosing
the contents of kernel memory, has been fixed. This module is not
enabled in FreeBSD by default. For more information, see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:10.

A programming error in the sendmail implementation of its ``DNS maps''
feature has been fixed by the import of a new version of sendmail. More
information can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:11. Note
that this feature is not used by the default configuration files shipped
with FreeBSD.

A buffer management bug in OpenSSH, which could potentially cause a
crash, has been fixed. More information can be found in security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:12.

A buffer overflow in sendmail has been fixed. More information can be
found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:13.

A bug that could allow the kernel to cause resource starvation which
eventually results in a system panic in the ARP cache code has been
fixed. More information can be found in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-03:14.

Several errors in the OpenSSH PAM challenge/authentication subsystem
have been fixed. The impacts of these bugs vary; details can be found in
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:15.

A bug in the readv(2) system call, which could potentially cause a
system crash or privilege escalation has been fixed. More information
can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:16.

A bug in procfs(5) and linprocfs(5), which could result in disclosing
the contents of kernel memory, has been fixed. More information can be
found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:17.

Four separate security flaws in OpenSSL, which could allow a remote
attacker to crash an OpenSSL-using application or to execute arbitrary
code with the privileges of the application, have been fixed. More
information can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:18.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Kernel Changes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1 Platform-Specific Hardware Support

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2 Boot Loader Changes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.3 Network Interface Support

bge(4) now supports Broadcom 5705 based Gigabit Ethernet NICs.

The dc(4) driver once again transmits packets correctly through Davicom
DC9102 cards.

The proatm driver has been added to support ProSum's ProATM
(IDT77252-based) interfaces. This driver is analogous to the patm driver
in FreeBSD-CURRENT.

sk(4) now supports SK-9521 V2.0 and 3COM 3C940 based Gigabit Ethernet
NICs.

The suspend/resume support for the wi(4) driver now works correctly when
the device is configured down.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.4 Network Protocols

A bug in ipfw(4) limit rule processing that could cause various panics
has been fixed.

ipfw(4) rules now support comma-separated address lists (such as
1.2.3.4, 5.6.7.8/30, 9.10.11.12/22), and allow spaces after commas to
make lists of addresses more readable.

ipfw(4) rules now support C++-style comments. Each comment is stored
together with its rule and appears using the ipfw(8) show command.

ipfw(8) can now modify ipfw(4) rules in set 31, which was read-only and
used for the default rules. They can be deleted by ipfw delete set 31
command but are not deleted by the ipfw flush command. This implements a
flexible form of ``persistent rules''. More details can be found in
ipfw(8).

Kernel support has been added for Protocol Independent Multicast
routing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.5 Disks and Storage

The da(4) driver no longer tries to send 6-byte commands to USB and
Firewire devices. Quirks for USB devices (which hopefully are now
unnecessary) have been disabled; to restore the old behavior, add
options DA_OLD_QUIRKS to the kernel configuration.

The twe(4) driver now supports the 3ware generic API.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.6 File Systems

A new DIRECTIO kernel option enables support for read operations that
bypass the buffer cache and put data directly into a userland buffer.
This feature requires that the O_DIRECT flag is set on the file
descriptor and that both the offset and length for the read operation
are multiples of the physical media sector size.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.7 PCCARD Support

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.8 Multimedia Support

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Userland Changes

arp(8) now supports a -i option to limit the scope of the current
operation to the ARP entries on a particular interface. This option
applies to the display operations only. It should be useful on routers
with numerous network interfaces.

chroot(8) now allows the optional setting of a user, primary group, or
group list to use inside the chroot environment via the -u, -g, and -G
options respectively.

ipfw(8) list and show command now support ranges of rule numbers.

ipfw(8) now supports a -n flag to test the syntax of commands without
actually changing anything.

The mount_msdos(8) utility now supports a -M option to specify the
maximum file permissions for directories in the file system.

systat(1) now includes displays for IPv6 and ICMPv6 traffic.

uudecode(1) and b64decode(1) now support a -r flag for decoding raw (or
broken) files that may be missing the initial and possibly final framing
lines.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4 Contributed Software

groff has been updated from 1.18.1 to 1.19.

lukemftpd (not built by default) has been updated from a 1.2beta1 to a 5
January 2003 snapshot from the NetBSD CVS repository.

OpenSSL has been updated from 0.9.7a to 0.9.7c.

sendmail has been updated to version 8.12.9.

texinfo has been updated from 4.5 to 4.6.

The timezone database has been updated from the tzdata2003a release to
the tzdata2003d release.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

pkg_create(1) now supports a -C option, which allows packages to
register a list of other packages with which they conflict. They will
refuse to install (via pkg_add(1)) if one of the listed packages is
already present. The -f flag to pkg_add(1) overrides this
conflict-checking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

The supported release of GNOME has been updated from 2.2 to 2.4.

The supported release of KDE has been updated from 3.1 to 3.1.4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

If you're upgrading from a previous release of FreeBSD, you generally
will have three options:

-   Using the binary upgrade option of sysinstall(8). This option is
    perhaps the quickest, although it presumes that your installation of
    FreeBSD uses no special compilation options.

-   Performing a complete reinstall of FreeBSD. Technically, this is not
    an upgrading method, and in any case is usually less convenient than
    a binary upgrade, in that it requires you to manually backup and
    restore the contents of /etc. However, it may be useful in cases
    where you want (or need) to change the partitioning of your disks.

-   From source code in /usr/src. This route is more flexible, but
    requires more disk space, time, and technical expertise. More
    information can be found in the ``Using make world'' section of the
    FreeBSD Handbook. Upgrading from very old versions of FreeBSD may be
    problematic; in cases like this, it is usually more effective to
    perform a binary upgrade or a complete reinstall.

Please read the INSTALL.TXT file for more information, preferably before
beginning an upgrade. If you are upgrading from source, please be sure
to read /usr/src/UPDATING as well.

Finally, if you want to use one of various means to track the -STABLE or
-CURRENT branches of FreeBSD, please be sure to consult the ``-CURRENT
vs. -STABLE'' section of the FreeBSD Handbook.

  Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should, of course, only be attempted
  after backing up all data and configuration files.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
