[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 4.10-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 The FreeBSD Documentation
Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v
1.1.2.123.2.2 2004/05/25 15:47:50 bmah Exp $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of Wind River Systems, Inc. This is
expected to change soon.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the ``™''
or the ``®'' symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 4.10-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release or too late in
  the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
  documentation. This information includes security advisories, as well
  as news relating to the software or documentation that could affect
  its operation or usability. An up-to-date version of this document
  should always be consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 4.10-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 4.11-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains ``late-breaking news'' about FreeBSD
4.10-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the ``current errata'' for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 4-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

No active security advisories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Late-Breaking News

(20 May 2004) A security problem was discovered in CVS but the release
notes did not state that since it was very late in the release cycle.
FreeBSD 4.10-RELEASE includes a fix for it and is not vulnerable. For
the details, see the security advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:10.

(23 May 2004) As a side effect of closing a security problem related to
msync(2), the MS_INVALIDATE flag no longer guarantees that all pages in
the range are invalidated. This can cause problems when pages are backed
by a remote file (e.g. via NFS) where other machines can write to the
permanent storage since the local pages not being invalidated might then
contain stale data. The security problem being addressed is a strictly
local exploit, and only allows a local user to block the writing of data
to a file under certain circumstances. Users who require the old
semantics of MS_INVALIDATE and are not concerned with the security issue
being fixed can set the vm.old_msync sysctl to 1 which will revert to
the old (insecure) behavior.

(25 May 2004) The twe(4) driver was recently updated by the vendor.
Problems have been reported in rare circumstances under conditions that
are hard to reproduce. Work is ongoing to isolate these problems and
determine their source.

(27 May 2004) The bfe(4) driver for Broadcom BCM4401 based Fast Ethernet
adapters has been added but the release notes did not mention that.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
