[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/powerpc 6.4-RELEASE Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008 The
FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD:
releng/6.4/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/common/new.sgml 184446
2008-10-29 19:11:03Z hrs $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

IBM, AIX, EtherJet, Netfinity, OS/2, PowerPC, PS/2, S/390, and ThinkPad
are trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in the
United States, other countries, or both.

IEEE, POSIX, and 802 are registered trademarks of Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. in the United States.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “®” symbol.

The release notes for FreeBSD 6.4-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system on the 6.4-STABLE development
line. This document lists applicable security advisories that were
issued since the last release, as well as significant changes to the
FreeBSD kernel and userland. Some brief remarks on upgrading are also
presented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 What's New

2.1 Security Advisories

2.2 Kernel Changes

2.2.1 Boot Loader Changes

2.2.2 Hardware Support

2.2.3 Network Protocols

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

2.3 Userland Changes

2.3.1 /etc/rc.d Scripts

2.4 Contributed Software

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 6.4-RELEASE on the
PowerPC hardware platform. It describes recently added, changed, or
deleted features of FreeBSD. It also provides some notes on upgrading
from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 6.4-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/ or any of its mirrors. More
information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the “Obtaining FreeBSD” appendix to the FreeBSD
Handbook.

All users are encouraged to consult the release errata before installing
FreeBSD. The errata document is updated with “late-breaking” information
discovered late in the release cycle or after the release. Typically, it
contains information on known bugs, security advisories, and corrections
to documentation. An up-to-date copy of the errata for FreeBSD
6.4-RELEASE can be found on the FreeBSD Web site.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 What's New

This section describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 6.3-RELEASE.

Typical release note items document recent security advisories issued
after 6.3-RELEASE, new drivers or hardware support, new commands or
options, major bug fixes, or contributed software upgrades. They may
also list changes to major ports/packages or release engineering
practices. Clearly the release notes cannot list every single change
made to FreeBSD between releases; this document focuses primarily on
security advisories, user-visible changes, and major architectural
improvements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Security Advisories

Problems described in the following security advisories has been fixed.
For more information, consult the individual advisories available from
http://security.FreeBSD.org/.

+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| Advisory    | Date        | Topic                                    |
+=============+=============+==========================================+
| SA-08:      | 14 Fe       | sendfile(2) write-only file permission   |
| 03.sendfile | bruary 2008 | bypass                                   |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA-08       | 17          | OpenSSH X11-forwarding privilege         |
| :05.openssh |  April 2008 | escalation                               |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA          | 1           | DNS cache poisoning                      |
| -08:06.bind | 3 July 2008 |                                          |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA-         | 3 Sep       | amd64 swapgs local privilege escalation  |
| 08:07.amd64 | tember 2008 |                                          |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA-         | 3 Sep       | Remote kernel panics on IPv6 connections |
| 08:09.icmp6 | tember 2008 |                                          |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| S           | 1 O         | IPv6 Neighbor Discovery Protocol routing |
| A-08:10.nd6 | ctober 2008 | vulnerability                            |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Kernel Changes

The opencrypto framework ( crypto(9)) and ipsec(4) subsystem now support
Camellia block cipher.

The FreeBSD kernel malloc(9) now supports buffer corruption protection
(RedZone). This detects both buffer underflow and buffer overflow bugs
at runtime on free(9) and realloc(9) and prints backtraces from where
memory was allocated and from where it was freed. For more details, see
DEBUG_REDZONE kernel option.

The client side functionality of rpc.lockd(8) has been implemented in
FreeBSD kernel. This implementation provides the correct semantics for
flock(2) style locks which are used by the lockf(1) command line tool
and the pidfile(3) library. It also implements recovery from server
restarts and ensures that dirty cache blocks are written to the server
before obtaining locks (allowing multiple clients to use file locking to
safely share data). Also, a new kernel option options NFSLOCKD has been
added and enabled by default.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1 Boot Loader Changes

FreeBSD now support booting from GPT-labeled disks from the BIOS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2 Hardware Support

The acpi_asus(4) driver now supports Asus EeePC backlight control.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.1 Multimedia Support

The DRM driver now supports i915 GME device.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.2 Network Interface Support

The bge(4) driver now supports BCM5906-based adapters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.3 Network Protocols

The dummynet(4) subsystem now supports fast mode operation which allows
certain packets to bypass the dummynet scheduler. This can achieve lower
latency and lower overhead when the packet flow is under the pipe
bandwidth, and eliminate recursion in the subsystem. The new sysctl
variable net.inet.ip.dummynet.io_fast has been added to enable this
feature.

The resolver(3) now allows underscore in domain names. Although this is
a violation of RFC 1034 [STD 13], it is accepted by certain name servers
as well as other popular operating systems' resolver library.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

The aac(4) driver now supports 64-bit array support for RAIDs larger
than 2TB and simultaneous opens of the device for issuing commands to
the controller.

A data corruption problem of the ata(4) driver on ServerWorks HT1000
chipsets has been fixed.

Stability of the iir(4) driver has been improved.

The mpt(4) driver now supports mpt_user personality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Userland Changes

The bsdtar(1) utility now supports the following options:
--numeric-owner, -S, and -s.

A bug in cp(1) utility which prevents POSIX.1e ACL (see also acl(3))
from copying properly has been fixed.

The cron(8) utility now supports -m flag which overrides the default
mail recipient for cron mails unless explicitly provided by MAILTO= line
in crontab file.

The cvs(1) now supports -n flag which is the opposite of -N flag.

The dump(8) and restore(8) utility now support extended attributes (see
also extattr(9)).

The fortune(6) program now supports FORTUNE_PATH environment variable to
specify search path of the fortune files.

A bug in the fortune(6) program that prevents -e option with multiple
files from working has been fixed.

The freebsd-update.conf(5) now supports IDSIgnorePaths statement.

The fwcontrol(8) utility now supports -f node option which specifies
node as the root node on the next bus reset.

The make(1) utility now supports :u variable modifier which removes
adjacent duplicate words.

The incorrect output grammer of morse(6) program has been fixed.

The mountd(8) utility now supports -h bindip option which specifies IP
addresses to bind to for TCP and UDP requests. This option may be
specified multiple times. If no -h option is specified, INADDR_ANY will
be used. Note that when specifying IP addresses with this option, it
will automatically add 127.0.0.1 and if IPv6 is enabled, ::1 to the
list.

The moused(8) utility now supports -L flag which changes the speed of
scrolling and changes -U option behavior to only affect the scroll
threshold.

The mv(1) now support POSIX specification when moving a directory to an
existing directory across devices.

The periodic(8) now supports daily_status_mail_rejects_shorten
configuration variable in periodic.conf(5). This allows the rejected
mail reports to tally the rejects per blacklist without providing
details about individual sender hosts. The default configuration keeps
the reports in their original form.

The ping6(8) now uses exit status of 0 and 2 in the same manner as
ping(8).

A bug in telnetd(8) that it attempts authentication even when -a all
option is specified has been fixed.

The top(1) and vmstat(8) now support -P flag which displays per-CPU
statistics.

The watch(8) utility now supports more than 10 snp(4) devices at a time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1 /etc/rc.d Scripts

The ike rc(8) script has been removed.

The rc.conf(5) now supports dummynet_enable variable which allow
dummynet(4) kernel module to be loaded when firewall_enable is YES.

The ppp rc(8) script now supports multiple instances. For more details,
see description of ppp_profile variable in rc.conf(5).

The rfcomm_pppd_server rc(8) script which allows start rfcomm_pppd(8) in
server mode at boot time, has been added. Multiple profiles can be
started at the same time. For more details, see rc.conf(5).

The sysctl rc(8) script now supports loading /etc/sysctl.conf.local in
addition to /etc/sysctl.conf.

The rc.conf(5) now supports configuration of interfaces and attached
networks for firewall rule set by rc.firewall when firewall_type is
simple or client. See firewall_client_net, firewall_simple_iif,
firewall_simple_inet, firewall_simple_oif, and firewall_simple_onet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4 Contributed Software

am-utils has been updated to version 6.1.5.

ISC BIND has been updated to version 9.3.5-P2.

bzip2 has been updated from 1.0.4 to 1.0.5.

NTP has been updated to version 4.2.4p5.

FILE has been updated to version 4.21.

libarchive has been virtually updated to 2.5.4b. Note that the internal
version number remains 1.9.25 because the API/ABI compatibility is
preserved.

ncurses library has been updated to version 5.6-20080503.

OpenPAM has been updated to Hydrangea release.

sendmail has been updated from 8.14.2 to 8.14.3.

tcsh has been updated to version 6.15.00.

The timezone database has been updated from the tzdata2007k release to
the tzdata2008e release.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

The pkg_install utilities have been upgraded to snapshot on 8.0-CURRENT
as of May 30, 2008.

The pkg_sign(1) and the pkg_check(1) utility have been removed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

The supported version of the GNOME desktop environment (x11/gnome2) has
been updated from 2.20.1 to 2.22.3.

The supported version of the KDE desktop environment (x11/kde3) has been
updated from 3.5.8 to 3.5.10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

Source upgrades to FreeBSD 6.4-RELEASE are only supported from FreeBSD
5.3-RELEASE or later. Users of older systems wanting to upgrade
6.4-RELEASE will need to update to FreeBSD 5.3 or newer first, then to
FreeBSD 6.4-RELEASE.

  Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should, of course, only be attempted
  after backing up all data and configuration files.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
