<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

title: "Source code repositories" sidenav: developers ---

Source code repositories

Git

Git is the tool the FreeBSD Project uses for keeping its sources under
control. Every change (with an accompanying log message explaining its
purpose) is stored. It can be easily viewed from the web interface
mentioned below.

In December 2020, development of the base system migrated from
Subversion to Git. The web interface is available for browsing the
repository.

In December 2020, the FreeBSD Documentation Project moved from
Subversion to Git. There is a web interface available for browsing the
contents of the FreeBSD Documentation Project Git repository.

In April 2021, the FreeBSD Ports tree has been moved from Subversion to
Git. There is a web interface for browsing the repository.

Subversion

Subversion (SVN for short) is the legacy tool the FreeBSD Project used
for keeping its sources under control. Every change (with an
accompanying log message explaining its purpose) is stored. It can be
easily viewed from the web interface mentioned below.

In June 2008, development of the base system migrated from CVS to
Subversion. Since December 2020, after development moved to Git,
Subversion only receives translated commits from git2svn exporter in
stable/11, stable/12 and supported release branches. The web interface
is available for browsing the repository.

In May 2012, the FreeBSD Documentation Project moved from CVS to
Subversion. The doc subversion repository does not receive any further
updates after the development moved from Subversion to Git since
December 2020. There is a web interface available for browsing the
contents of the FreeBSD Documentation Project SVN repository.

In July 2012, the FreeBSD Ports tree moved from CVS to Subversion. The
ports subversion repository does not receive any further updates after
the development moved from Subversion to Git since April 2021. There is
a web interface for browsing the repository.

Last updated 2023-07-22 23:09:49 +0800
