[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Boot Performance Improvements

Links:
Wiki page URL: https://wiki.freebsd.org/BootTime
OS boot time comparison URL:
https://www.daemonology.net/blog/2021-08-12-EC2-boot-time-benchmarking.html

Contact: Colin Percival <cperciva@FreeBSD.org>

Colin Percival is coordinating an effort to speed up the FreeBSD boot
process. For benchmarking purposes, he is primarily using an EC2
c5.xlarge instance as a reference platform and is measuring the time
between when the virtual machine enters the EC2 "running" state and when
it is possible to SSH into the instance.

This work started in 2017, and as of the end of September 2021 the
FreeBSD boot time was reduced from approximately 30 seconds to
approximately 15 seconds.

During 2021Q4, further improvements have shaved more time off the boot
process, taking it down to roughly 10 seconds. A further 4 seconds of
improvements are in process.

In addition, the userland boot process is now being profiled using
TSLOG, making it possible to see flamecharts of the entire boot process;
and the ec2-boot-bench tool is now able to generate MP4 videos of the
boot process by taking snapshots of the EC2 VGA console.

Issues are listed on the wiki page as they are identified; the wiki page
also has instructions for performing profiling. Users are encouraged to
profile the boot process on their own systems, in case they experience
delays which don’t show up on the system Colin is using for testing.

This work is supported by Colin’s FreeBSD/EC2 Patreon.

Sponsor: https://www.patreon.com/cperciva

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: March 10, 2022 by Joseph Mingrone

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
