[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

LLDB Debugger Improvements

Links:
Moritz Systems Project Description URL:
https://www.moritz.systems/blog/freebsd-kgdb-support-in-lldb/
Progress Report 3 URL:
https://www.moritz.systems/blog/lldb-serial-port-communication-support/
Progress Report 4 URL:
https://www.moritz.systems/blog/lldb-freebsd-kernel-core-dump-support/
LLVM Git Repository URL: https://github.com/moritz-systems/llvm-project
libfbsdvmcore Git Repository URL:
https://github.com/moritz-systems/libfbsdvmcore

Contact: Kamil Rytarowski <kamil@moritz.systems>
Contact: Michał Górny <mgorny@moritz.systems>

According to the upstream description, "LLDB is a next generation,
high-performance debugger. It is built as a set of reusable components
which highly leverage existing libraries in the larger LLVM Project,
such as the Clang expression parser and LLVM disassembler."

FreeBSD includes LLDB in the base system. At present, it has some
limitations compared to the GNU GDB debugger, and does not yet provide a
complete replacement. This project spans from July 2021 to January 2022
and aims to make LLDB suitable for debugging FreeBSD kernels.

The earlier part of the project was focused on improving compatibility
between LLDB and other servers implementing the GDB Remote Protocol.
This was followed by implementing a fully-featured serial port support
and then support for FreeBSD kernel core dumps (vmcores).

The LLDB client gained much improved support for connecting to the
remote server over a serial port, and the LLDB server gained support for
accepting communication over a serial port. This opened the possibility
of using LLDB to debug embedded devices that use the RS232 interface. It
can also aid debugging kernels on regular PCs as it does not rely on the
network stack.

Support for FreeBSD vmcores has also been added to LLDB. This makes it
possible to inspect the crashed kernel state without having to resort to
KGDB or manually convert the vmcore into the standard ELF format
supported by LLDB.

The introduced changes are expected to be shipped with LLDB 14.0.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: March 10, 2022 by Joseph Mingrone

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
