[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

Â 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 11.2-RELEASE Release Notes

Abstract

The release notes for FreeBSD 11.2-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system on the 11.2-STABLE development
line. This document lists applicable security advisories that were
issued since the last release, as well as significant changes to the
FreeBSD kernel and userland. Some brief remarks on upgrading are also
presented.

Table of Contents

-   Introduction

-   Upgrading from Previous Releases of FreeBSD

-   Security and Errata

    -   Security Advisories

    -   Errata Notices

-   Userland

    -   Userland Application Changes

    -   Contributed Software

    -   Installation and Configuration Tools

-   Kernel

    -   General Kernel Changes

    -   Kernel Bug Fixes

    -   Kernel Configuration

    -   System Tuning and Controls

-   Devices and Drivers

    -   Device Drivers

-   Hardware Support

    -   Virtualization Support

-   Storage

    -   geom(4)

-   Boot Loader Changes

    -   Boot Loader Changes

-   Networking

    -   General Network Changes

-   Ports Collection and Package Infrastructure

    -   Packaging Changes

-   Release Engineering and Integration

    -   Integration Changes

Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 11.2-RELEASE. It
describes recently added, changed, or deleted features of FreeBSD. It
also provides some notes on upgrading from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 11.2-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at https://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/ or any of its mirrors.
More information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the Obtaining FreeBSD' appendix to the FreeBSD
Handbook.

All users are encouraged to consult the release errata before installing
FreeBSD. The errata document is updated with "late-breaking" information
discovered late in the release cycle or after the release. Typically, it
contains information on known bugs, security advisories, and corrections
to documentation. An up-to-date copy of the errata for FreeBSD
11.2-RELEASE can be found on the FreeBSD Web site.

This document describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 11.1-RELEASE. In general, changes described here are
unique to the 11.2-STABLE branch unless specifically marked as MERGED
features.

Typical release note items document recent security advisories issued
after 11.1-RELEASE, new drivers or hardware support, new commands or
options, major bug fixes, or contributed software upgrades. They may
also list changes to major ports/packages or release engineering
practices. Clearly the release notes cannot list every single change
made to FreeBSD between releases; this document focuses primarily on
security advisories, user-visible changes, and major architectural
improvements.

Upgrading from Previous Releases of FreeBSD

[amd64,i386] Binary upgrades between RELEASE versions (and snapshots of
the various security branches) are supported using the freebsd-update(8)
utility. The binary upgrade procedure will update unmodified userland
utilities, as well as unmodified GENERIC kernels distributed as a part
of an official FreeBSD release. The freebsd-update(8) utility requires
that the host being upgraded have Internet connectivity.

Source-based upgrades (those based on recompiling the FreeBSD base
system from source code) from previous versions are supported, according
to the instructions in /usr/src/UPDATING.

Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should only be attempted after backing up
all data and configuration files.

Security and Errata

This section lists the various Security Advisories and Errata Notices
since 11.1-RELEASE.

Security Advisories

+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| Advisory                  | Date               | Topic              |
+===========================+====================+====================+
| FreeBSD-SA-17:06.openssh  | 10 August 2017     | Denial of Service  |
|                           |                    | vulnerability      |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-17:07.wpa      | 16 October 2017    | WPA2 protocol      |
|                           |                    | vulnerability      |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-17:08.ptrace   | 15 November 2017   | Kernel data leak   |
|                           |                    | via                |
|                           |                    | ptrace(PT_LWPINFO) |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-17:10.kldstat  | 15 November 2017   | Information leak   |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-17:11.openssl  | 29 November 2017   | Multiple           |
|                           |                    | vulnerabilities    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-17:12.openssl  | 09 December 2017   | Multiple           |
|                           |                    | vulnerabilities    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-18:01.ipsec    | 07 March 2018      | Fix IPSEC          |
|                           |                    | validation and     |
|                           |                    | use-after-free     |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-18:02.ntp      | 07 March 2018      | Multiple           |
|                           |                    | vulnerabilities    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-18             | 14 March 2018      | Speculative        |
| :03.speculative_execution |                    | Execution          |
|                           |                    | Vulnerabilities    |
|                           |                    |                    |
|                           |                    | Note: This         |
|                           |                    | advisory addresses |
|                           |                    | the most           |
|                           |                    | significant issues |
|                           |                    | for FreeBSD 11.x   |
|                           |                    | on amd64 CPUs. We  |
|                           |                    | expect to update   |
|                           |                    | this advisory to   |
|                           |                    | include i386 and   |
|                           |                    | other CPUs.        |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-18:04.vt       | 04 April 2018      | Fix vt(4) console  |
|                           |                    | memory disclosure  |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-18:05.ipsec    | 04 April 2018      | Fix denial of      |
|                           |                    | service            |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-18:06.debugreg | 08 May 2018        | Mishandling of x86 |
|                           |                    | debug exceptions   |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-18:07.lazyfpu  | 21 June 2018       | Fix Lazy FPU       |
|                           |                    | information        |
|                           |                    | disclosure         |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Errata Notices

+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| Errata                    | Date               | Topic              |
+===========================+====================+====================+
| FreeBSD-EN-17:07.vnet     | 10 August 2017     | VNET kernel panic  |
|                           |                    | with asynchronous  |
|                           |                    | I/O                |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-17:08.pf       | 10 August 2017     | pf(4) housekeeping |
|                           |                    | thread causes      |
|                           |                    | kernel panic       |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-17:09.tzdata   | 2 November 2017    | Timezone database  |
|                           |                    | information update |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-18:01.tzdata   | 07 March 2018      | Timezone database  |
|                           |                    | information update |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-18:02.file     | 07 March 2018      | Stack-based buffer |
|                           |                    | overflow           |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-18:03.tzdata   | 04 April 2018      | Update timezone    |
|                           |                    | database           |
|                           |                    | information        |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-18:04.mem      | 04 April 2018      | Multiple small     |
|                           |                    | kernel memory      |
|                           |                    | disclosures        |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-18:05.mem      | 08 May 2018        | Multiple small     |
|                           |                    | kernel memory      |
|                           |                    | disclosures        |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-18:06.tzdata   | 08 May 2018        | Update timezone    |
|                           |                    | database           |
|                           |                    | information        |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Userland

This section covers changes and additions to userland applications,
contributed software, and system utilities.

Userland Application Changes

The ln(1) utility has been updated to correct the behavior of the -F
flag by unlinking an existing directory before creating a symbolic link.
(r321092)

The crontab(1) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -f, which
forces crontab(5) removal when -r is used non-interactively. (r321241)

The newsyslog(8) utility has been updated to support RFC5424-compliant
messages when rotating system logs. (r321262)

The sesutil(8) utility has been updated to include libxo(3) support in
output. (r321287) (Sponsored by Gandi.net)

The diskinfo(8) utility has been updated to include two new flags, -s
which displays the disk identity (usually the serial number), and -p
which displays the physical path to the disk in a storage controller.
The -s and -p flags are mutually exclusive, and cannot be used with any
other flags. (r321927)

The diskinfo(8) utility has also been updated to include device model
when the -s flag is used. (r321929)

The top(1) utility has been updated to allow filtering on multiple user
names when the -U flag is used. (r322509)

The bsdgrep(1) utility has been updated to include a rgrep hard link to
grep(1), which when used is equivalent to grep -r. (r322525)

The bsdgrep(1) utility has been updated to address various issues with
pattern matching behavior. (r322555)

The umount(8) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -N, which
is used to forcefully unmount an NFS mounted filesystem. (r322910)

The pw(8) utility has been updated to properly handle empty secondary
group lists as an argument to the -G flag when using the usermod
subcommand. (r322919)

The getconf(1) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -a, which
prints the name and value of all system or path configuration values to
stdout(4) or optionally a file as an argument to -a. (r324124)
(Sponsored by Chelsio Communications)

The ps(1) utility has been updated to reflect realtime and idle
priorities in state flags. (r324270)

The ps(1) utility has been updated to display if a process is running
with capsicum(4) capability mode, indicated by C. (r324271)

The cpucontrol(8) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -n,
that disables the default microcode update search path when used.
(r324380)

The fsck_ffs(8) utility has been updated to prevent a filesystem from
being reported as modified when only the timestamp in the superblock is
updated. (r324674)

The diskinfo(8) utility has been updated to display disk rotation rate
and if TRIM/UNMAP is supported by the disk. (r325003) (Sponsored by
Spectra Logic)

The rsh(1) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -N, which
disables shutdown of a socket sending path when used. (r325473)

The pfctl(8) utility has been updated to allow route-to to properly
handle network interfaces with multiple IP addresses. (r326413)

The camcontrol(8) utility has been updated to include ZAC (Zoned-device
ATA command set) information when the identify subcommand is used.
(r326778) (Sponsored by Spectra Logic)

The pw(8) utility has been updated to correct handling of account
expiration periods. (r326848)

The mdmfs(8) utility has been updated to support tmpfs(5). (r327592)

The lint(1) utility is not longer built by default. The WITH_LINT
src.conf(5) option has been added to enable building and installing the
utility. (r327837)

The cpucontrol(8) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -e,
which is used to re-evaluate reported CPU features after applying
firmware updates. (r327871)

Note: The cpucontrol(8) -e flag should only be used after microcode
update have been applied to all CPUs in the system, otherwise system
instability may be experienced if processor features are not identical
across the system.

The indent(1) utility has been updated to respect the
SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX environment variable if set. (r328138)

The du(1) utility has been updated to include the --si long option,
which is used to display output in "human-readable" output in powers of
1000. (r328139)

The df(1) utility has been updated to include the --si long option,
which is an alias to -H. (r328140)

The service(8) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -j, which
is used to interact with services running within a jail(8). The argument
to -j can be either the name or numeric jail ID. (r328599)

The fsck_ffs(8) utility has been updated to exit with a non-zero status
when the filesystem is not repaired. (r328604) (Sponsored by Dell EMC)

The nvmecontrol(8) utility has been updated to print the full 128 bit
value for SMART data, instead of the hexadecimal value. (r328668)

The nvmecontrol(8) utility has been updated to include control options
for Western Digital HGST drives. The new options are cap-diag,
get-crash-dump, drive-log, purge, and purge-monitor. (r328716)

The dhclient(8) utility has been updated to be more compliant with
RFC2131 by setting the source address field in the IP header to 0 when
sending a DHCPREQUEST message to attempt to obtain a previously-assigned
IP address. (r330692) (Sponsored by Dell EMC)

The pw(8) utility has been updated to allow the @ and ! characters in
the GECOS field. (r330694) (Sponsored by Dell EMC)

The zfsd(8) utility has been updated to work with any type of GEOM
provider, including md(4), geli(8), glabel(8), and gstripe(8). (r330733)
(Sponsored by Spectra Logic)

The ps(1) utility has been updated to include a jail keyword, which when
used will list the name of a jail(8) instead of the numeric ID.
(r331471)

The mlx5tool(8) utility has been added, which is used to manage
Connect-X 4 and Connect-X 5 devices supported by mlx5io(4). (r331586)
(Sponsored by Mellanox Technologies)

The sysctl(8) utility has been updated to support setting an array of
values to nodes. Prior to this change, sysctl(8) could only set one
value to a node that may return multiple values when queried. (r331603)
(Sponsored by Chelsio Communications)

The ifconfig(8) utility has been updated to include a random option,
which when used with the ether option, generates a random MAC address
for an interface. (r331729)

The efibootmgr(8) utility has been added, which is used to manipulate
the EFI boot manager. (r332126) (Sponsored by Netflix)

The etdump(1) utility has been added, which is used to view El Torito
boot catalog information. (r332947)

The mount(8) utility has been updated to allow fallback to mount media
read-only if an attempt to mount write-protected media read-write fails.
This behavior is disabled by default, and can be requested with the new
autoro option. (r322753)

The makefs(8) utility has been updated to default the block and fragment
sizes to match that of newfs(8), 32K and 4K, respectively. (r332460)
(Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The pwd_mkdb(8) utility has been updated to emit a notice that legacy
database support will be removed effective FreeBSD 12 when the -l flag
is used. (r332929) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The dhclient(8) utility has been updated to allow the interface-mtu
option to be overridden with a supersede entry in dhclient.conf(5).
(r334789)

Contributed Software

The libarchive(3) library has been updated to version 3.3.2. (r321303)

Subversion has been updated to version 1.9.7. (r322442)

The dtc(1) utility has been updated to upstream commit 9ce35ff8.
(r328495)

The file(1) utility has been updated to version 5.32. (r328874)

OpenSSH has been updated to version 7.5p1. (r323136)

The mandoc(1) utility has been updated to version 1.14.3. (r324581)

The tcpdump(1) utility has been updated to version 4.9.2. (r327234)

The NTP utilities have been updated to version 4.2.8p11. (r330106)

The less(1) utility has been updated to upstream version v530. (r330570)

The bmake utility has been updated to upstream version 20180222.
(r331246)

The BSD-licensed diff(1) utility has been imported from OpenBSD, which
is installed if WITHOUT_GNU_DIFF is set in src.conf(5), and otherwise
not installed by default. (r331465)

OpenSSL has been updated to version 1.0.2o. (r331638)

The clang, llvm, lld, lldb, and compiler-rt utilities as well as libc++
have been updated to upstream version 6.0.0. (r331838)

Timezone data files have been updated to version 2018e. (r333312)

The libxo(3) library has been updated to version 0.9.0. (r334458)

Installation and Configuration Tools

[arm64] The bsdinstall(8) installer has been updated to default to
UEFI-only boot. (r322254) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

Kernel

This section covers changes to kernel configurations, system tuning, and
system control parameters that are not otherwise categorized.

General Kernel Changes

The linux(4) ABI compaibility layer has been updated to include support
for musl consumers. (r321007)

The fdescfs(5) filesystem has been updated to support Linux -specific
fd(4) /dev/fd and /proc/self/fd behavior. (r322340)

Support for multiple realtime clocks has been added. (r323447)

Kernel Bug Fixes

The ng_iface(4) driver has been updated to prevent a possible system
crash. (r324175)

The ipfw(4) packet filter has been updated to identify layer-2 and
layer-3 packets, fixing dummynet(4) AQM packet marking. (r325730)

An issue causing boot issues with IntelÂ® Apollo Lakeâ¢ CPUs has been
fixed. (r333166)

Kernel Configuration

The watchdog(4) facility has been updated to make SW_WATCHDOG dynamic,
enabling the software watchdogd(8) option whenever a hardware watchdog
is not present. (r327920)

System Tuning and Controls

The p1003_1b.aio_listio_max sysctl(8) has been changed to a
runtime-configurable tunable. (r326322) (Sponsored by Spectra Logic)

Devices and Drivers

This section covers changes and additions to devices and device drivers
since 11.1-RELEASE.

Device Drivers

The cxgbe(4) driver has been updated to firmware version 1.16.63.0 for
T4, T5, and T6 network adapters. (r330307) (Sponsored by Chelsio
Communications)

The ng_pppoe(4) driver has been updated to add support for user-supplied
Host-Uniq tags. (r331058)

Support for the TAIO USB multi-protocol adapter (TUMPA) has been added.
(r331500)

The mlx5io(4) driver has been added, providing an interface to manage
supported Connect-X 4 and Connect-X 5 network adapters. (r331586)
(Sponsored by Mellanox Technologies)

The cm(4) and fpa(4) drivers have been marked as deprecated, and will be
removed in FreeBSD 12. (r331882) (Sponsored by DARPA, AFRL)

The ocs_fc(4) driver has been added, supporting Emulex 16/8G FC GEN 5
HBAs LPe15004 and LPe160XX, and Emulex 32/16G FC GEN 6 HBAs LPe3100X and
LPe3200X. (r332040) (Sponsored by Broadcom Limited)

The ixgb(4) driver has been marked as deprecated, and will be removed in
FreeBSD 12. (r333171)

The ixl(4) driver has been updated to version 1.9.9-k. (r333343)
(Sponsored by Intel Corporation)

The nxge(4) driver has been marked as deprecated, and will be removed in
FreeBSD 12. (r333367)

The lmc(4) driver has been marked as deprecated, and will be removed in
FreeBSD 12. (r333412) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The smartpqi(4) driver has been added, providing support for Microsemi
SCSI controllers. (r333417)

The vxge(4) driver has been marked as deprecated, and will be removed in
FreeBSD 12. (r333738)

Hardware Support

This section covers general hardware support for physical machines,
hypervisors, and virtualization environments, as well as hardware
changes and updates that do not otherwise fit in other sections of this
document.

Virtualization Support

Support for virtio_console(4) has been added to bhyve(4). (r321413)

Storage

This section covers changes and additions to file systems and other
storage subsystems, both local and networked.

geom(4)

The geom_aes, geom_bsd, geom_mbr, geom_sunlabel geom(4) classes have
been marked as deprecated. They have been replaced by the geom_part
class in FreeBSD 7, and removed from the GENERIC kernel configurations
in FreeBSD 8, and will be removed in FreeBSD 12. (r332519)

Boot Loader Changes

This section covers the boot loader, boot menu, and other boot-related
changes.

Boot Loader Changes

The boot code and loader(8) have been updated to check for unsupported
ZFS feature flags. If unsupported features are active, the pool is not
considered as a bootable pool, and a diagnostic message is printed to
the console. (r321519)

The loader(8) has been updated to improve quotation parsing,
distinguishing between single- and double-quotes, and check for
terminating quotes. (r329010)

The length of GELI passphrases entered when booting a system with
encrypted disks is now hidden by default. See the configuration options
in geli(8) to restore the previous behavior. (r329114)

Networking

This section describes changes that affect networking in FreeBSD.

General Network Changes

The icmp6(4) protocol has been updated to fix ICMPv6 redirects.
(r329581) (Sponsored by Dell EMC)

Ports Collection and Package Infrastructure

This section covers changes to the FreeBSD Ports Collection, package
infrastructure, and package maintenance and installation tools.

Packaging Changes

The pkg(8) utility has been updated to version 1.10.5.

Release Engineering and Integration

This section convers changes that are specific to the FreeBSD Release
Engineering processes.

Integration Changes

Amazon EC2â¢ instances now keep their clocks synchronized using the
Amazon Time Sync Service, the NTP service internal to the EC2â¢
infrastructure. (r326892)

The i386 memory stick image installers have been changed to use the MBR
partitioning scheme, which addresses a boot issue from a GPT partition
scheme in non-UEFI mode. (r333410) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The amd64 memory stick image installers have been changed to use the MBR
partitioning scheme, which addresses a boot issue from a GPT partition
scheme in non-UEFI mode. (r334444) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: June 19, 2021 by Danilo G. Baio

Legal Notices | Â© 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
