[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v
1.1.2.113 2003/10/06 04:21:21 bmah Exp $

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release or too late in
  the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
  documentation. This information includes security advisories, as well
  as news relating to the software or documentation that could affect
  its operation or usability. An up-to-date version of this document
  should always be consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains ``late-breaking news'' about FreeBSD
4.8-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the ``current errata'' for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 4-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

A buffer overflow in header parsing exists in older versions of
sendmail. It could allow a remote attacker to create a specially-crafted
message that may cause sendmail(8) to execute arbitrary code with the
privileges of the user running it, typically root. More information,
including pointers to patches, can be found in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-03:07. This problem was corrected for FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE
with a vendor patch and was corrected for FreeBSD 4.9-RC with the import
of a new version of sendmail. However, these changes may not otherwise
have been noted in the release documentation.

The implementation of the realpath(3) function contains a single-byte
buffer overflow bug. This may have various impacts, depending on the
application using realpath(3) and other factors. This bug has been fixed
on the 4.8-RELEASE security fix branch and the 4-STABLE development
branch. For more information, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:08.

The kernel contains a bug that could allow it to attempt delivery of
invalid signals, leading to a kernel panic. This bug has been fixed on
the 4-STABLE development branch and the 4.8-RELEASE security fix branch.
For more information, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:09.

A bug in the iBCS2 emulation module could result in disclosing the
contents of kernel memory. (Note that this module is not enabled in
FreeBSD by default.) This bug has been fixed on the 4-STABLE development
branch and the 4.8-RELEASE security fix branch. More information can be
found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:10.

A programming error in the sendmail implementation of its ``DNS maps''
feature could lead to a sendmail(8) child process crashing or behaving
incorrectly. This error has been fixed with a patch on the 4.8-RELEASE
security fix branch and with the import of a new version of sendmail on
the 4-STABLE development branch. (Note that the DNS maps feature is not
used by the default configuration files shipped with FreeBSD.) More
information can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:11.

OpenSSH contains a bug in its buffer management code that could
potentially cause it to crash. This bug has been fixed via a
vendor-supplied patch on the 4-STABLE development branch and the
4.8-RELEASE security fix branch. For more details, refer to security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:12.

sendmail contains a remotely-exploitable buffer overflow. This bug has
been fixed via a vendor-supplied patch on the 4-STABLE development
branch and the 4.8-RELEASE security fix branch. More details can be
found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:13.

The FreeBSD ARP code contains a bug that could allow the kernel to cause
resource starvation which eventually results in a system panic. This bug
has been fixed on the 4-STABLE development branch and the 4.8-RELEASE
security fix branch. More information can be found in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-03:14.

Several bugs in the OpenSSH PAM authentication code could have impacts
ranging from incorrect authentication to a stack corruption. These have
been corrected via vendor-supplied patches; details can be found in
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:15.

The implementation of the readv(2) system call contains a bug which
could potentially cause a system crash or privilege escalation. This bug
has been fixed on the 4-STABLE development branch and the 4.8-RELEASE
security fix branch. More information can be found in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-03:16.

The implementation of the procfs(5) and the linprocfs(5) contain a bug
that could result in disclosing the contents of kernel memory. This bug
has been fixed on the 4-STABLE development branch and the 4.8-RELEASE
security fix branch. More information can be found in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-03:17.

OpenSSL contains several bugs which could allow a remote attacker to
crash an OpenSSL-using application or to execute arbitrary code with the
privileges of the application. These bugs have been fixed with the
import of a new version of OpenSSL on the 4-STABLE development branch
and with a vendor-supplied patch on the 4.8-RELEASE security fix branch.
Note that only applications that use OpenSSL's ASN.1 or X.509 handling
code are affected (OpenSSH is unaffected, for example). More information
can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:18.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Late-Breaking News

Due to some problems discovered very late in the release cycle, the ISO
images and FTP install directories for FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE/i386 needed
to be re-generated and re-uploaded to the FTP mirror sites. For
reference, the final ISO images have checksums computed via md5(1) as
follows:

    MD5 (4.8-RELEASE-i386-disc1.iso) = c4e34b6a6be5cd1977ca206bf821c7fc
    MD5 (4.8-RELEASE-i386-disc2.iso) = 93b09f97c01deead302557d7d24f87cb
    MD5 (4.8-RELEASE-i386-mini.iso) = 5f0d2576dbb56d6ec85d49ac9fa4bbf9

Some parts of the documentation may incorrectly give the release date of
FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE as March 2003, rather than April 2003.

FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE restores the ability to install from the
installation media to a mly(4) device. (This capability was broken in
FreeBSD 4.7-RELEASE.)

After installing GNOME, the default terminal font might be garbled. If
this is the case, install the x11-fonts/bitstream-vera port, then
restart GNOME. The new fonts should take effect automatically. If they
do not, edit the current gnome-terminal profile and select the Bitstream
Vera Sans Mono font.

Due to space limitations, the awi(4) driver has been removed from the
kernel used on the 1.44MB kern.flp i386 boot floppy. Because no module
is available for this driver in FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE, this means that it
is generally not possible to install FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE over an awi(4)
network.

Due to space limitations, support for ATAPI floppy disks and the DEC
AlphaServer 8200 and 8400 (``TurboLaser'') machines has been removed
from the kernel used on the 1.44MB kern.flp alpha boot floppy.

A bug in the FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE kernel prevents it from booting on an
Intel 80386 processor. This problem has been corrected on both the
4.8-RELEASE security fix branch and the 4-STABLE development branch.

FreeBSD supports a hashed form of the login capabilities database,
stored in /etc/login.conf.db. This is generated from the /etc/login.conf
text file. If the hashed database is present, login(1) will use it in
preference to the contents of the text file. FreeBSD 4.8-RELEASE is the
first release that actually includes /etc/login.conf.db on the
distribution media; thus, users modifying /etc/login.conf need to
remember to regenerate the database, using cap_mkdb(1). Users performing
source upgrades are generally not affected by this change, because
mergemaster(8) offers the option to regenerate /etc/login.conf.db during
upgrades. login.conf(5) has more details on the format and usage of the
login capabilities database.

A file that is a part of the multimedia/gstreamer-plugins port may
appear to have a corrupted filename when the ports collection is
installed using sysinstall(8). This should not affect building the port
or installing the corresponding package. However, it is recommended to
rename the file in question, to prevent problems during any future
updates to the installed ports collection:

    # cd /usr/ports/multimedia/gstreamer-plugins/files
    # mv patch-gst-libs_ext_ffmpeg_ffmpeg_libavcodec_alpha_simple_i \
    patch-gst-libs_ext_ffmpeg_ffmpeg_libavcodec_alpha_simple_idct_alpha.c

Recently the mailing lists were changed from majordomo to the currently
used Mailman list server. More information about using the new mailing
lists can be found by visiting the FreeBSD Mailman Info Page.

The dc(4) driver does not properly transmit data through Davicom DC9102
cards. This problem, which has been present since FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE,
has been corrected for FreeBSD 4.9-RC.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 4-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
