[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Linux compatibility layer update

Contact: Edward Tomasz Napierala, <trasz@FreeBSD.org>

Linuxulator improvements have been ongoing for the last two years, with
support from the FreeBSD Foundation over a few distinct project grants
as well as contributions from the community. The goal of this project is
to improve FreeBSD’s ability to execute unmodified Linux binaries.
Current support status of specific Linux applications is being tracked
at the Linux app status Wiki page.

The work this quarter focused on making sure the 13.0-RELEASE ships with
Linuxulator in a good shape, and fixing problems reported by users.
There are some new directories provided by linsysfs(5), the lack of
which, through a curious chain of events, broke installation of make(1)
in Ubuntu Focal. The getcwd(2) syscall was fixed to no longer return the
wrong error value for certain conditions, which was breaking Mono. The
getsockopt(2) syscall now supports SO_PEERSEC and SO_PEERGROUPS, which
are being used by su(8) and sudo(8). Other fixes include flag handling
for 32-bit send(2) syscall, and several ptrace(2) problems, which were
affecting Steam games. The kernel version was bumped to 3.17.0 to
unbreak Qt applications from Focal. The sysutils/debootstrap port, and
its corresponding debootstrap package, now correctly handle Ubuntu’s GPG
keys. The debootstrap utility now installs the mremap(2) workaround for
apt(8). This reduces the number of steps required to set up Linux chroot
or jail. Finally there have been some improvements to the startup
scripts.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 1, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
