[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 4.4-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v 1.1.2.43
2002/01/25 04:12:28 bmah Exp $

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 4.4-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release. This information
  includes security advisories, as well as news relating to the software
  or documentation that could affect its operation or usability. An
  up-to-date version of this document should always be consulted before
  installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 4.4-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains ``late-breaking news'' about FreeBSD
4.4-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the ``current errata'' for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 4-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

Support for per-user ~/.login_conf files (as documented in
login.conf(5)) was disabled due to incorrect merging of local and global
settings. This problem has been fixed in FreeBSD 4.5-RC.

A local root vulnerability in UUCP was corrected before the release of
FreeBSD 4.4-RELEASE and documented in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-01:62. The release notes mentioned the correction, but not
the security advisory, which was issued after the release date of
4.4-RELEASE.

A security hole in OpenSSH could allow users to execute code with
arbitrary privileges if UseLogin yes was set, has been closed. Note that
the default value of this setting is UseLogin no. For more information,
including workarounds and bugfixes, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-01:63.

The use of an insecure temporary directory by pkg_add(1) could permit a
local attacker to modify the contents of binary packages while they were
being installed. This hole has been closed. For more information, see
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:01.

A race condition in pw(8), which could expose the contents of
/etc/master.passwd, has been eliminated. For more information, including
workarounds and bugfixes, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:02.

A bug in k5su(8) could have allowed a process that had given up
superuser privileges to regain them. This bug has been fixed. (See
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:07.)

A race condition in the exec(3) system call, which could result in local
users obtaining increased privileges, has been fixed. For more
information, including bugfixes, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:08.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 System Update Information

The handling of some types of comments in printcap(5) files is faulty.
If a comment line ends in :\ (the characters normally used to indicate
the continuation of a printer definition), the line following the
comment will be parsed as a part of the previous printer definition.

One of the release notes refers to the net.inet.tcp.tcp_seq_genscheme
sysctl variable for enabling improved compatability in TCP's initial
sequence number generation algorithm. This variable was rendered
unnecessary by the adoption of an algorithm based on RFC 1948, which
restores proper operation in all cases while maintaining a high level of
unpredictability in initial sequence numbers.

The tools/ directory of a FreeBSD CDROM distribution typically contains
some DOS programs for i386 machines, such as fdimage.exe and fips.exe.
This directory was inadvertently omitted from the initial 4.4-RELEASE
ISO images generated by the FreeBSD Project. Corrected versions of the
4.4-install.iso and 4.4-mini.iso ISO images were regenerated on
Saturday, 22 September 2001. For those who need these DOS-mode tools and
do not wish to re-fetch the ISO images, the contents of the tools/
directory are available by anonymous FTP at
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/tools (many mirrors also have a copy
of this directory).

One of the items in the release notes gave a workaround for hangs during
PCCARD ejection, but gave the wrong syntax for the necessary command.
The correct command line is:

        # pccardc power slot 0

On the i386, the minimum memory requirement for installing FreeBSD via
sysinstall(8) is 16MB, with 4-8MB required to run FreeBSD with a
pared-down kernel. The installation instructions in INSTALL.TXT (and
other renditions thereof) cited somewhat lower figures.

A release note mentioned the merging of two libraries used for password
authentication hashing, but listed their names incorrectly. The
libraries that were merged were libscrypt and libdescrypt; the new
unified library is called libcrypt.

A problem has been noted with an increasing number of device drivers
that make heavy use of and, in some cases, can overflow, the kernel
stack. This problem has an easily-identifable signature; processes
randomly receive a SIGPROF signal and may die with the message
``Profiling time alarm''. For those users experiencing this problem, a
workaround is to edit /src/sys/i386/include/param.h and change the line
which reads:

        #define UPAGES  2

to read:

        #define UPAGES  3

It will be necessary to recompile the kernel and reboot for the change
to take effect. This problem has been fixed in FreeBSD 4.5-RC.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://stable.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 4-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
