[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD Snapshot Releases

What Are Snapshots?

As part of an ongoing effort to improve the overall release process
before a release actually slips out the door with problems, we are now
periodically producing interim test releases called snapshots. These
snapshots will be very similar to full releases, except that they might
not include all the bits included in a full release (such as packages
and updated documentation).

Getting Snapshots

The latest snapshots made available can be found on the FreeBSD mirrors
at the address https://download.FreeBSD.org/snapshots/. They can also be
found in the same directory on other mirror sites.

Please note that sometimes the snapshots available to download may be
somewhat outdated.

Currently the snapshots of -CURRENT and -STABLE are available in
directories whose URLs have the format
https://download.FreeBSD.org/snapshots/<target>/<target_arch>/ where
<target> and <target_arch> represent the architecture for which the
snapshot was built. For each supported platform, the snapshot includes
ISO images of the bootonly, release, and memstick images.

Things You Might Want to Know

In particular, before getting and installing a snapshot release, be
aware of following:

-   The snapshots are primarily for testing purposes and not fully
    tested compared to the releases. They may include experimental or
    degraded features that can corrupt your existing system.

-   The major release number will not be changed in the main
    distribution for each snapshot. It will only be changed on the
    installation medium so that you know when the snapshot was made.
    These are not releases, these are snapshots, and it is important
    that this distinction be preserved. Although people can and will, of
    course, refer to snapshots by date in email, do not confuse them.

-   Snapshots might not include package sets, but will generally include
    a ports tree.

-   Finally, we will not necessarily update the documentation. For
    example, README may still refer to a previous release. This is
    because that is much less important than getting the real bug fixes
    and new features out for testing. Please do not send a bug report
    about version numbers.

Your feedback on these snapshots is greatly welcome. They are not just
for our benefit - those who are coming to rely on FreeBSD for mission
critical applications should welcome a chance to get at more updated
bits in a structured fashion. You can also use these snapshots as
tangible evidence that your feedback is getting incorporated and that
you (hopefully) will not have any unpleasant surprises in the next
release. On the other hand, if you do send us hate mail next release and
it turns out that you never even tried the snapshots, well, it cuts both
ways!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: February 25, 2022 by Ryusuke SUZUKI

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
