[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

LLDB Debugger Improvements

Links:
Moritz Systems Project Description URL:
link:https://www.moritz.systems/blog/freebsd-kgdb-support-in-lldb/
Progress Report 1 URL:
https://www.moritz.systems/blog/improving-gdb-protocol-compatibility-in-lldb/
Progress Report 2 URL:
https://www.moritz.systems/blog/improving-gdb-register-model-compatibility-in-lldb/
Git Repository URL: https://github.com/moritz-systems/llvm-project

Contact: Kamil Rytarowski <kamil@moritz.systems>
Contact: Michał Górny <mgorny@moritz.systems>

According to the upstream description, "LLDB is a next generation,
high-performance debugger. It is built as a set of reusable components
which highly leverage existing libraries in the larger LLVM Project,
such as the Clang expression parser and LLVM disassembler."

FreeBSD includes LLDB in the base system. At present, it has some
limitations compared to the GNU GDB debugger, and does not yet provide a
complete replacement. This project spans from July 2021 to January 2022
and aims to make LLDB suitable for debugging FreeBSD kernels.

The work so far was focused on improving the compatibility between LLDB
and other servers implementing the GDB Remote Protocol. Multiple bugs
were fixed that limited LLDB’s functionality when interfacing with GNU
GDB’s gdbserver and QEMU’s gdbserver implementations. Support for
debugging executables running on gdbserver architectures other than
amd64 was fixed, and was explicitly tested on arm64 and i386.

This effort also resulted in adjusting lldb-server’s implementation to
conform better to the standard set by GDB. Thanks to these improvements,
the LLDB client needs to provide less divergent code paths depending on
the server used, and the single code path used is tested more
thoroughly.

The work also involved improvements to the LLDB API and code
deduplication, that result in reducing the maintenance effort and
lowering the bar for future contributions. The test coverage was
improved, increasing the likelihood that any future problems will be
detected before they affect users.

The introduced changes are expected to be shipped with LLDB 14.0.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: November 15, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
