[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 2.2.7 Announcement

Date: Wed, 22 Jul 1998 08:36:25 -0700
From: "Jordan K. Hubbard" <jkh@time.cdrom.com>
Subject:FreeBSD 2.2.7 is now released!

It is my usual pleasure to announce the release of FreeBSD 2.2.7, our
latest release along the 2.2-stable branch. Those folks who are still
running 2.1.x and wish to upgrade to 2.2 technology are encouraged to do
so as 2.2.7 has reached a more than equivalent level of stability in all
of our tests. A number of problems with 2.2.6 have also been fixed (see
the release notes for more information).

FreeBSD 2.2.7-RELEASE is available on ftp.FreeBSD.org and various FTP
mirror sites throughout the world. It can also be ordered on CD from
Walnut Creek CDROM, from where it will be shipping shortly as a 4 CD set
containing a lot of extra stuff of interest to programmers and general
users alike.

IMPORTANT NOTE: All of the profits from the sales of this CD set go to
support the FreeBSD Project!

Like many businesses in the field of high-tech, Walnut Creek CDROM has
realized that in order to make any product for an emerging market grow,
you have to make a significant investment in such growth, even if it
means abandoning short-term profits. Walnut Creek CDROM is the only
CDROM vendor who currently does anything like this and it’s certainly my
hope that you will help support the project by buying (or getting
someone else to buy :) one of their CDs. Thanks!

The official FTP distribution site for FreeBSD is:

  ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD

Or via the WEB page at:

  http://www.cdrom.com/pub/FreeBSD

And on CD-ROM from Walnut Creek CDROM:

  Walnut Creek CDROM
  4041 Pike Lane, #F
  Concord CA, 94520 USA
  Phone: +1 925 674-0783
  Fax: +1 925 674-0821
  Tech Support: +1 925 603-1234
  Email: info@cdrom.com
  WWW: http://www.cdrom.com/

If you are in Japan, please refer to Pacific HiTech for information on
ordering a localized (or the english) version of the 2.2.7 product.
Pacific HiTech is now an affiliate of Walnut Creek CDROM for Japanese
sales of FreeBSD.

Additionally, FreeBSD is available via anonymous FTP from mirror sites
in the following countries: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Hong Kong, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Korea, Latvia,
Malaysia, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Taiwan, Thailand, the Ukraine and the
United Kingdom (and quite possibly several others which I’ve never even
heard of :).

Before trying the central FTP site, please check your regional mirror(s)
first by going to:

  ftp://ftp.<yourdomain>.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD

Any additional mirror sites will be labeled ftp2, ftp3 and so on.

The latest versions of export-restricted code for FreeBSD (2.0C or
later) (eBones and secure) are also being made available at the
following locations. If you are outside the U.S. or Canada, please get
secure (DES) and eBones (Kerberos) from one of the following foreign
distribution sites:

South Africa

    ftp://ftp.internat.F reeBSD.ORG/pub/FreeBSD
    ftp://ftp2.internat.FreeBS D.ORG/pub/FreeBSD

Brazil

    ftp://ftp.br.FreeBSD.ORG/p ub/FreeBSD

Finland

    ftp://nic.funet.f i/pub/unix/FreeBSD/eurocrypt

Release Home

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: February 21, 2021 by Danilo G. Baio

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
