[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

FreeBSD Advocacy Project

Why Choose FreeBSD?

Why would you consider using FreeBSD? We think that there are lots of
reasons. Here is a selection of reasons that some of our existing users
gave for their choice of operating system.

The Community

FreeBSD is a community-driven operating system despite it being to a
partial degree sponsored corporately. FreeBSD has active mailing lists,
forums, and IRC channels where experienced users and developers are
always willing to help the less experienced.

The community is largely driven by technology, not ideology, and is
focused on building the best possible system and making FreeBSD as
widely used as possible, not on pushing any other agendas.

There is no dictator—benevolent or otherwise—for the project. The Core
Team is elected and is nominally responsible for overseeing the goals of
the project, but this is a very light touch. Core mediates disputes
between developers, but rarely needs to take an active role in
development, beyond their separate contributions as individual
developers.

Stability

Stability means many different things. FreeBSD very rarely crashes (and
when it does it is usually due to hardware faults), but while that was a
great boast a decade ago, now it is an expected feature for any
operating system.

Stability in FreeBSD means much more than that. It means that upgrading
the system does not require upgrading the user. Configuration interfaces
do change over time, but only when there is a good reason. If you
learned how to use FreeBSD in 2000, most of your knowledge would still
be relevant.

Backwards compatibility is very important to the FreeBSD team, and any
release in a major release series is expected to be able to run any
code—including kernel modules—that ran on an earlier version. The entire
base system is developed together, including the kernel, the core
utilities, and the configuration system, so upgrades are usually
painless. Included tools like mergemaster help update configuration
files with little or no manual intervention.

Early Adoption and Collaboration With Other Projects

FreeBSD has been one of the first adopters of the LLVM infrastructure,
including the clang compiler and the libc stack. The entire FreeBSD
system, including kernel and userspace, can build with clang, and from
FreeBSD both clang and the permissively-licensed libc are included,
giving a modern, BSD-licensed C++ stack. Several FreeBSD developers are
also active contributors to LLVM, ensuring that both projects thrive
together.

This same collaboration works downstream, with projects like GhostBSD,
MidnightBSD, NomadBSD and pfSense building on top of the FreeBSD base to
provide desktop and firewall oriented distributions, respectively. These
projects are not forks, they base their work on the latest version of
FreeBSD and customize the system for specific uses.

Simple Configuration

FreeBSD service initialization is very simple. Each service, whether
part of the base system or installed from a port, comes with a script
that is responsible for starting and stopping it (and often some other
options). The /etc/rc.conf file contains a list of variables for
enabling and configuring services. Want to enable ssh? Just add
sshd_enable="YES" to your rc.conf file. This system makes it easy to see
at a glance everything that will be started when your system boots.

The rc system that reads this file understands dependencies between
services and so can automatically launch them in parallel, or wait until
one is finished before starting the things that it needs. You get all of
the benefits of a modern configuration system, without a complex
interface.

Ports

The ports tree contains a large collection of third-party software,
including older versions of some things where the userbase is divided
about the benefits of upgrading, and a lot of niche programs. The
chances are that anything you want to run which works on FreeBSD will be
there.

Unlike some other systems, FreeBSD maintains a clean division between
the base system and third-party ports and packages. All third-party
software goes in /usr/local, so if you want to repurpose a machine, it
is trivial to simply delete all installed packages and then start
installing the ones that you want.

The pkg(8) tool makes working with binary packages even easier, although
source installs are still supported for people who want the level of
configurability that this implies.

Security

Security is vital in any network-connected machine. FreeBSD provides a
number of tools for ensuring that you can maintain a secure system, such
as:

-   Jails, allowing you to run applications or entire systems in a
    sandbox that cannot access the rest of the system. With tools like
    ezjail and ZFS you can instantly create a new jail with a clone of
    an existing system, using a tiny amount of disk space, and run
    untrusted code inside it.

-   Mandatory Access Control, from the TrustedBSD project, allowing you
    to configure access control policies for all operating system
    resources.

-   Capsicum, from FreeBSD 9 onwards, allows developers to easily
    implement privilege separation, reducing the impact of compromised
    code.

-   The VuXML system for publishing vulnerabilities in ports, which
    integrates with tools such as pkg, so that your daily security email
    tells you about any known vulnerabilities in ported software.

-   Security event auditing, using the BSM standard.

And, of course, all of the standard features that are expected from a
modern UNIX® system including IPSec, SSH, and so on.

ZFS

Cheap snapshots, clones, end-to-end checksums, deduplication,
compression, and no need to decide partition sizes on install. Using ZFS
for a few days makes going back to a more traditional volume manager
painful. If you want to test something with ZFS, it is trivial to just
create a snapshot and roll back if it didn’t work.

ZFS lets you clone an existing jail in under a second, no matter how big
the jail itself is.

GEOM

Even without ZFS, FreeBSD comes with a rich storage system. GEOM layers
providers and consumers in arbitrary ways, allowing you to use two
networked machines for high-availability storage, use your choice of
RAID level, or add features like compression or encryption.

Working Sound

FreeBSD 4.x introduced in-kernel sound mixing, so that multiple
applications could play sound at the same time even with cheap sound
cards with no hardware mixing support. FreeBSD 5.x automatically
allocated new channels to applications, without any configuration.

Now, FreeBSD has low-latency sound mixing with per-application volume
controls and full support for the OSS 4 APIs out of the box. There is no
need to configure a userspace sound daemon. The same audio APIs that
were used a decade ago still work on FreeBSD, including some
compatibility modes to allow applications that try to manipulate the
global volume to only change their own. If you want to watch DVDs with
5.1 surround sound, just install your favourite media player and press
play.

My System, How I Want It

FreeBSD gives you an easy-to-use, working, UNIX®-like system. This base
system can then be extended easily. If you want to run KDE or GNOME,
then just install the metapackage for the version that you prefer. If
you want a headless server, then it is equally easy to install the
server tools that you want.

It is easy to run the FreeBSD installer via a serial port and to
configure the entire system from the terminal. It is also easy to
install and use an existing desktop environment. The decisions about the
kind of system you want to use are left to you.

If you are deploying FreeBSD in a corporate environment, then it is very
easy to customise both the base system and the set of installed packages
for your specific requirements. The build system provides numerous
tuneable variables allowing you to build exactly the base system that
meets your needs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: February 21, 2021 by Danilo G. Baio

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
