[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Status reports: New workflow

Links:
FreeBSD status reports URL: https://www.freebsd.org/status/
Status reports GitHub repository URL:
https://github.com/freebsd/freebsd-quarterly

Contact: <status@FreeBSD.org>

Goals of the new workflow

This quarter the status team has been discussing with doceng@ some
improvements to its workflow. In particular, the team is attempting to
merge its GitHub repository into the FreeBSD doc/ repository.

Here are the reasons for such a change:

-   having two independent repositories requires spending some time to
    make sure that both are in sync, which is being done manually. See
    for example commits such as
    https://github.com/freebsd/freebsd-quarterly/commit/4b8255e604dd0513e841aa8f3dce7741e78b999c,
    which are not immediately clear in their commit messages about what
    is being done unless more time is invested to copy commit messages
    properly;

-   the FreeBSD doc/ repository is self-hosted, while the status
    repository is hosted on GitHub. Since the contents of the
    self-hosted repository are mirrored, nothing is being lost in
    visibility with the repository merging.

Some inconsistencies about the name of the team have also been found:
the team has been referred to as "quarterly", "quarterly status team",
"status", "status team", "monthly" etc. So this issue is also being
addressed.

Please note that we are still working on these changes and that they
might not be completed within the next quarter. The status team will
take care to keep all information about report submissions up to date so
that you always know how to submit your reports.

Team naming

Since "quarterly" might refer to quarterly reports but also to quarterly
branches, using "quarterly" only could cause some confusion in some
contexts. "quarterly-status" is likely a bad idea as well, as the
frequency of reports publication might need to change in the future.
Thus just "status" has been chosen: this is correct as quarterly status
reports contain information about the status of the development of
FreeBSD, it is frequency-agnostic and consistent with its FreeBSD
website section.

The following email addresses have been created:

-   the main contact address for the status team is now
    <status@FreeBSD.org>. Mails sent to quarterly@FreeBSD.org will still
    reach the team, but you are encouraged to use the new address;

-   the email address for the status report submissions is now
    <status-submissions@FreeBSD.org>. Mails sent to
    quarterly-submissions@FreeBSD.org will still reach the team, but you
    are encouraged to use the new address;

-   the quarterly-calls mailing list has been renamed to status-calls.
    If you were already subscribed to quarterly-calls, you do not need
    to resubscribe.

Report submission

Three different ways to submit reports will be provided:

-   submitting a review on Phabricator. A new Phabricator group called
    "status" has been created. If you would like to give a hand to the
    team by reviewing reports we suggest you add yourself to the group
    'watchers';

-   submitting a pull request at
    https://github.com/freebsd/freebsd-doc/pulls;

-   sending an email to status-submissions@FreeBSD.org.

Reviewing processes will proceed as they usually do on each of these
channels.

Other changes

-   The repository merging will require reworking some of the existing
    tools to better integrate with the existent structure of the FreeBSD
    doc/ repository.

-   The status reports GitHub repository will be archived once the new
    workflow implementation is completed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: January 26, 2023 by Maxim Konovalov

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
