[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/i386 4.10-RELEASE Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 The FreeBSD Documentation
Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/common/new.sgml,v
1.22.2.410.2.3 2004/05/22 00:22:41 hrs Exp $

The release notes for FreeBSD 4.10-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system since 4.9-RELEASE. Both changes
for kernel and userland are listed, as well as applicable security
advisories for the base system that were issued since the last release.
Some brief remarks on upgrading are also presented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 What's New

2.1 Security Advisories

2.2 Kernel Changes

2.2.1 Platform-Specific Hardware Support

2.2.2 Boot Loader Changes

2.2.3 Network Interface Support

2.2.4 Network Protocols

2.2.5 Disks and Storage

2.2.6 File Systems

2.2.7 PCCARD Support

2.2.8 Multimedia Support

2.3 Userland Changes

2.4 Contributed Software

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 4.10-RELEASE on the
i386 hardware platform. It describes new features of FreeBSD that have
been added (or changed) since 4.9-RELEASE. It also provides some notes
on upgrading from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 4.10-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/ or any of its mirrors. More
information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the ``Obtaining FreeBSD'' appendix in the
FreeBSD Handbook.

For significant information discovered after the release or last-minute
changes in the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
documentation, please read Errata document.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 What's New

This section describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 4.9-RELEASE. Typical release note items document new
drivers or hardware support, new commands or options, major bugfixes, or
contributed software upgrades. Security advisories for the base system
that were issued after 4.9-RELEASE are also listed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Security Advisories

A potential denial of service in BIND has been fixed. For more
information, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:19.

A bug with the System V Shared Memory interface (specifically the
shmat(2) system call) has been fixed. This bug can cause a shared memory
segment to reference unallocated kernel memory. In turn, this can permit
a local attacker to gain unauthorized access to parts of kernel memory,
possibly resulting in disclosure of sensitive information, bypass of
access control mechanisms, or privilege escalation. More details can be
found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:02.

A potential low-bandwidth denial-of-service attack against the FreeBSD
TCP stack has been prevented by limiting the number of out-of-sequence
TCP segments that can be held at one time. More details can be found in
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:04.

A bug in OpenSSL's SSL/TLS ChangeCipherSpec message processing could
result in a null pointer dereference, has been fixed. This could allow a
remote attacker to crash an OpenSSL-using application and cause a
denial-of-service on the system. More details can be found in security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:05.

Two programming errors in CVS have been fixed. They allow a server to
overwrite arbitrary files on the client, and a client to read arbitrary
files on the server when accessing remote CVS repositories. More details
can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:07.

A bugfix for Heimdal rectifies a problem in which it would not perform
adequate checking of authentication across autonomous realms. For more
information, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:08.

A fix in kadmind(8) closes a potential buffer overflow. Details can be
found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:09.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Kernel Changes

The cx(4) driver for Cronyx Sigma synchronous / asynchronous serial
adapters has been updated to version 4.4.0.

The ctau(4) driver has been added for Cronyx-Tau synchronous serial
adapters. This driver was known for a long time as ``ct'' in its
previous life outside the FreeBSD source tree.

  Note: The driver name has changed, but the network interface still has
  the ``ct'' name.

The dcons(4) ``dumb console'' driver has been added to provide a local
and remote console. It can be accessed over FireWire using the
dcons_crom(4) driver. A dconschat(8) utility provides user access to
dcons(4) devices.

A bug in mmap(2) that pages marked as PROT_NONE may become readable
under certain circumstances, has been fixed.

The stl(4) driver has been updated to version 5.6.0b1.

The umct(4) driver, which provides support for USB to RS-232 converters
based on the Magic Control Technology USB-232 has been added.

The usb(4) support has been improved, which includes a lot of bug fixes
and early support for some USB2 devices.

  Note: umodem(4) now uses /dev/ucom* instead of /dev/umodem* device
  nodes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1 Platform-Specific Hardware Support

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2 Boot Loader Changes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.3 Network Interface Support

A short hiccup in the em(4) during parameter reconfiguration, has been
fixed.

A bug, which prevents VLAN support in the nge(4) driver from working has
been fixed.

Several bugs related to polling(4) support in the rl(4) driver have been
fixed.

The ste(4) driver now supports polling(4).

The hardware TX checksum support of the xl(4) driver has been disabled
as it does not work correctly and slows down the transmission rate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.4 Network Protocols

The DA_OLD_QUIRKS kernel option, which is for the CAM SCSI disk driver (
cam(4)) has been removed.

The TCP implementation now includes partial (output-only) support for
RFC 2385 (TCP-MD5) digest support. This feature, enabled with the
TCP_SIGNATURE and FAST_IPSEC kernel options, is a TCP option for
authenticating TCP sessions. setkey(8) now includes support for the
TCP-MD5 class of security associations.

The random ephemeral port allocation, which come from OpenBSD has been
implemented. This is enabled by default and can be disabled using the
net.inet.ip.portrange.randomized sysctl.

The ng_vlan(4) NetGraph node type, which supports IEEE 802.1Q VLAN
tagging has been added.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.5 Disks and Storage

The amr(4) driver now has system crashdump support.

The twa(4) driver, which supports 3ware's 9000 series PATA/SATA RAID
controllers has been added.

The umass(4) driver now supports the missing ATAPI MMC commands and
handles the timeout properly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.6 File Systems

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.7 PCCARD Support

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.8 Multimedia Support

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Userland Changes

disklabel(8) now supports a -f option to work on regular files which
contain disk images.

ifconfig(8) now supports a staticarp option for an interface, which
disables the sending of ARP requests for that interface.

ifconfig(8) now prints the polling(4) status on the interface.

killall(1) now supports a -e flag to make the -u operate on effective,
rather than real, user IDs.

The default mode for the lost+found directory of fsck(8) is now 0700
instead of 01777.

The libalias library, natd(8), and ppp(8) now support Cisco Skinny
Station protocol, which is the protocol used by Cisco IP phones to talk
to Cisco Call Managers. Note that currently having the Call Manager
behind the NAT gateway is not supported.

libdisk now uses the correct PC98 disk partition value for FreeBSD. This
permits the sysinstall(8) disk partition editor to correctly create a
single FreeBSD partition covering the entire disk.

makewhatis(1), formerly a Perl script, has been reimplemented in C.

ps(1) compatibility with POSIX/SUSv3 has been improved. The changes
include -p for a list of process IDs, -t for a list of terminal names,
-A which is equivalent to -ax, -G for a list of group IDs, -X which is
the opposite of -x, and some minor improvements. For more information,
see ps(1).

pw(8) now supports a -H option, which accepts an encrypted password on a
file descriptor.

rtld(1) now has support for the dynamic mapping of shared object
dependencies. More information on using this feature can be found in
libmap.conf(5).

The sconfig(8) utility was added as a part of cx(4) driver update. It
replaces the cxconfig utility for managing cx(4) devices.

stat(1) from NetBSD, as of 5 June 2002 has, been imported.

which(1), formerly a Perl script, has been reimplemented in C.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4 Contributed Software

BIND has been updated from version 8.3.4 to version 8.3.7.

OpenSSL has been updated from version 0.9.7c to version 0.9.7d.

sendmail has been updated from version 8.12.9 to version 8.12.11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

The SIZE attribute for distfiles, which can be used for checking file
sizes before fetching, has been added and enabled by default.
DISABLE_SIZE is a user control knob to disable the distfile size
checking. This is especially useful on old FreeBSD versions which didn't
have fetch(1) support for this, and for some FTP proxies which always
report incorrect or bogus sizes.

Two new files have been added to the ports tree to track note-worthy
changes: ports/CHANGES lists major changes to the Ports Collection and
its infrastructure. ports/UPDATING describes some potential pitfalls
that can be encountered when updating certain ports, analogous to
src/UPDATING for the base system.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

The supported release of GNOME has been updated from 2.4 to 2.6.

  Note: If you are using the older GNOME desktop itself (x11/gnome2),
  simply upgrading it from the FreeBSD Ports Collection with
  portupgrade(1) (sysutils/portupgrade) will cause serious problems. If
  you are a GNOME desktop user, please read the instructions carefully
  at http://www.FreeBSD.org/gnome/docs/faq26.html, and use the
  gnome_upgrade.sh script to properly upgrade to GNOME 2.6.

  Note that if you are just a casual user of some of the GNOME
  libraries, portupgrade(1) should be sufficient to update your ports.

The supported release of KDE has been updated from 3.1.4 to 3.2.2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

If you're upgrading from a previous release of FreeBSD, you generally
will have three options:

-   Using the binary upgrade option of sysinstall(8). This option is
    perhaps the quickest, although it presumes that your installation of
    FreeBSD uses no special compilation options.

-   Performing a complete reinstall of FreeBSD. Technically, this is not
    an upgrading method, and in any case is usually less convenient than
    a binary upgrade, in that it requires you to manually backup and
    restore the contents of /etc. However, it may be useful in cases
    where you want (or need) to change the partitioning of your disks.

-   From source code in /usr/src. This route is more flexible, but
    requires more disk space, time, and technical expertise. More
    information can be found in the ``Using make world'' section of the
    FreeBSD Handbook. Upgrading from very old versions of FreeBSD may be
    problematic; in cases like this, it is usually more effective to
    perform a binary upgrade or a complete reinstall.

Please read the INSTALL.TXT file for more information, preferably before
beginning an upgrade. If you are upgrading from source, please be sure
to read /usr/src/UPDATING as well.

Finally, if you want to use one of various means to track the -STABLE or
-CURRENT branches of FreeBSD, please be sure to consult the ``-CURRENT
vs. -STABLE'' section of the FreeBSD Handbook.

  Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should, of course, only be attempted
  after backing up all data and configuration files.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
