[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Documentation Engineering Team

Links:
FreeBSD Documentation Project URL: https://www.freebsd.org/docproj/
FreeBSD Documentation Project Primer for New Contributors URL:
link:https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/fdp-primer/
Documentation Engineering Team URL:
https://www.freebsd.org/administration/#t-doceng

Contact: FreeBSD Doceng Team <doceng@FreeBSD.org>

The doceng@ team is a body to handle some of the meta-project issues
associated with the FreeBSD Documentation Project; for more information,
see FreeBSD Doceng Team Charter.

During the last quarter, Philip Paeps (philip@) and Li-Wen Hsu (lwhsu@),
already src and ports committers, were granted documentation commit
bits, both now have all commit bit types. Ed Maste (emaste@) who is
already a src committer was granted a documentation commit bit. We also
said goodbye to Murray Stokely (murray@), Gábor Kövesdán (gabor@),
Warren Block (wblock@), and Sevan Janiyan (sevan@). Gábor Kövesdán
(gabor@) and Warren Block (wblock@) are now former members of the
doceng@ team; we thank them for their years of service.

Implicit (blanket) approvals were documented in the Committers Guide.
That does not cover all cases, but doceng@ encourages any FreeBSD
committer from ports and src to contribute to the doc tree.

All ports/packages misc/freebsd-doc-* were updated. They have the entire
documentation set from the FreeBSD Documentation Project, like Handbook,
FAQ, articles, and more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: November 15, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
