[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 5.3-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 The FreeBSD Documentation
Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v
1.69.2.15 2004/11/22 17:20:42 hrs Exp $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

AMD, Athlon, Opteron, and Geode are trademarks or registered trademarks
of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. in the United States and other
countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the ``™''
or the ``®'' symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 5.3-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release or too late in
  the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
  documentation. This information includes security advisories, as well
  as news relating to the software or documentation that could affect
  its operation or usability. An up-to-date version of this document
  should always be consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 5.3-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 5.4-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains ``late-breaking news'' about FreeBSD
5.3-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the ``current errata'' for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 5-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

(1 Dec 2004) A bug in procfs(5) and linprocfs(5) which could cause a
malicious local user could perform a local denial of service attack by
causing a system panic, or the user could read parts of kernel memory,
has been fixed. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-04:17.

(18 Nov 2004) A bug in the fetch(1) utility which allows a malicious
HTTP server to cause arbitrary portions of the client's memory to be
overwritten, has been fixed. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-04:16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Open Issues

(31 Oct 2004) The re(4) and em(4) drivers may behave poorly under heavy
load. In particular, there are reports of em(4) on the IBM ThinkPad T40
locking up under such conditions.

(31 Oct 2004) There are reports of the sk(4) driver locking up under
heavy load, especially when ASUStek on-board NICs are used. To clear the
condition, bringing the interface down then back up and/or rebooting the
system may be needed.

(31 Oct 2004) The burncd(8) utility is functional but may behave
erratically on some systems. Reported symptoms include that burncd(8)
can appear to hang and never complete while the operation actually does
complete, and the progress indicator does not show the correct value.
Workarounds include:

-   Eject and re-insert the media after burning a CD.

-   Press Ctrl-C when burncd(8) appears to hang up while the access LED
    goes inactive.

(31 Oct 2004) When the user/group rule clauses in pf(4) and ipfw(4) are
used, the loader tunable debug.mpsafenet must be set to 0 (this is 1 by
default). For example, the following rules are affected:

for ipfw(4):

    count ip from any to 192.168.2.1 uid root

for pf(4):

    block log quick proto { tcp, udp } all user root

To set debug.mpsafenet to 0 on every boot, add the following line into
/boot/loader.conf:

    debug.mpsafenet=0

More specifically, the group and user filter parameters in pf(4), and
the gid, jail, and uid rule options in ipfw(4) are affected. If
debug.mpsafenet is set to 1, the system can hang when the rule is
evaluated due to a lock order reversal with the socket layer. More
details can be found in the ipfw(8) and pf.conf(5) manual pages.

(31 Oct 2004, updated on 12 Nov 2004) The vinum(4) subsystem works on
5.3, but it can cause a system panic at boot time. As a workaround you
can add vinum_load="YES" to /boot/loader.conf.

As an alternative you can also use the new geom(4)-based vinum(4)
subsystem. To activate the geom(4)-aware vinum at boot time, add
geom_vinum_load="YES" to /boot/loader.conf and remove start_vinum="YES"
in /etc/rc.conf if it exists.

While some uncommon configurations, such as multiple vinum drives on a
disk, are not supported, it is generally backward compatible. Note that
for the geom(4)-aware vinum, its new userland control program, gvinum,
should be used, and it is not yet feature-complete.

(31 Oct 2004) The results of netstat -m can become incorrect on SMP
systems when debug.mpsafenet is set to 1 (default). This is an error in
the statistics gathering because of a race condition in the counters,
not an actual memory leak.

(31 Oct 2004, updated on 5 Nov 2004) For FreeBSD/i386 and FreeBSD/amd64,
when installing FreeBSD 5.3 using an USB keyboard the keyboard will stop
working once the kernel boots, because a PS/2 keyboard is always
considered to be attached. As a workaround, select ``Escape to loader
prompt'' in the boot loader menu and enter the following lines at the
prompt:

    set hint.atkbd.0.flags="0x1"
    boot

Note that if you use the boot floppies, this is set by default.

After the installation, add the following line to /boot/loader.conf:

    hint.atkbd.0.flags="0x1"

(1 Nov 2004) The ULE scheduler described in the release notes has been
completely disabled to discourage its use because it has stability
problems.

(1 Nov 2004) Programs linked with libpthread may not report any CPU
usage statistics according to top(1), while those linked with libthr
show the correct statistics.

(1 Nov 2004) ATA RAID support for the CMD649 and SiI0680 ATA controllers
is non-functional in this release. When such a controller is brough up
under ata(4) (ataraid) on 5.3, the RAID configuration stored under 5.2
or prior may be corrupted.

(3 Nov 2004) For FreeBSD/i386 and FreeBSD/amd64, SMP support in the
GENERIC kernel has been disabled by default because the SMP kernel can
degrade the performance on UP machines. A kernel configuration file SMP,
which can be used to enable SMP support, has been added. More details on
building the custom kernel can be found at
http://www.FreeBSD.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/kernelconfig.html.

(4 Nov 2004) The tar(1) utility (also known as bsdtar(1)) does not
detect the end of media such as tape and floppy disk properly when it is
specified with the -f option. As an alternative gtar(1) (GNU tar) can be
used.

(9 Nov 2004) The geom(4)-aware vinum(4) subsystem does not work for
RAID5 volumes on machines with a single processor. The configurations
other than RAID5 (such as RAID1) should work correctly. This problem has
been fixed on the RELENG_5 branch.

(9 Nov 2004) The FreeBSD 5.3-RELEASE Migration Guide should have stated
that /usr/sbin/nslookup and /usr/sbin/nsupdate included in BIND 8 have
to be removed during the source-based upgrade procedure.

(9 Nov 2004) The FreeBSD 5.3-RELEASE Release Notes should have stated
that net/mpd which was compiled on the old systems prior to 5.3-RELEASE
must be recompiled.

(10 Nov 2004) The FreeBSD 5.3-RELEASE Release Notes should have stated
explicitly that ports/packages which were built on the old systems prior
to 5.3-RELEASE and linked with the old POSIX thread libraries (libc_r or
libkse) can cause an error ``Spinlock called when not threaded.'' at run
time. This happens when the program is linked with multiple different
threading libraries (typically the older ports will be linked with
libc_r, while newer ports will be linked with libpthread). Either
recompile the ports/packages or add the necessary lines to
/etc/libmap.conf. More details can be found in /usr/src/UPDATING
(20040303 and 20040130).

(12 Nov 2004) The em(4) driver behaves incorrectly when the VLAN support
and promiscuous mode are enabled at the same time. A fix is being tested
and will be merged to the 5.3 errata branch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Late-Breaking News

No news.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 5-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
