[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

Early Adopter's Guide to FreeBSD 5.1-RELEASE

The FreeBSD Release Engineering Team

Copyright © 2002, 2003 by The FreeBSD Release Engineering Team

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/early-adopter/article.sgml,v
1.15 2003/05/03 22:14:55 bmah Exp $

This article describes the status of FreeBSD 5.1-RELEASE, from the
standpoint of users who may be new to the 5.X series of releases or to
FreeBSD in general. It presents some background information on release
engineering, some highlights of new features, and some possible
drawbacks that might be faced by early adopters. It also contains some
of the future release engineering plans for the 4-STABLE development
branch and some tips on upgrading existing systems.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

FreeBSD 5.X marks the first new major version of FreeBSD in over two
years. Besides a number of new features, it also contains a number of
major developments in the underlying system architecture. Along with
these advances, however, comes a system that incorporates a tremendous
amount of new and not-widely-tested code. Compared to the existing line
of 4.X releases, the first few 5.X releases may have regressions in
areas of stability, performance, and occasionally functionality.

For these reasons, the Release Engineering Team <re@FreeBSD.org>
specifically discourages users from updating from older FreeBSD releases
to 5.1-RELEASE unless they are aware of (and prepared to deal with)
possible regressions in the newer releases. Specifically, for more
conservative users, we recommend running 4.X releases (such as
4.8-RELEASE) for the near-term future. We feel that such users are
probably best served by upgrading to 5.X only after a 5-STABLE
development branch has been created; this may be around the time of
5.2-RELEASE.

(FreeBSD 5.X suffers from what has been described as a ``chicken and
egg'' problem. The entire project has a goal of producing releases that
are as stable and reliable as possible. This stability and reliability
requires widespread testing, particularly of the system's newer
features. However, getting a large number of users to test the system,
in a practical sense, means building and distributing a release first!)

This article describes some of the issues involved in installing and
running FreeBSD 5.1-RELEASE. We begin with a brief overview of the
FreeBSD release process. We then present some of the more noteworthy new
features in FreeBSD 5.1-RELEASE, along with some areas that may prove
troublesome for unwary users. For those users choosing to remain with
4-STABLE-based releases, we give some of the short- to medium-term plans
for this development branch. Finally, we present some notes on upgrading
existing 4.X systems to 5.1-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 An Overview of the FreeBSD Release Process

FreeBSD employs a model of development that relies on multiple
development branches within the source code repository. The main branch
is called ``CURRENT'', and is referred to in the CVS repository with the
HEAD tag. New features are committed first to this branch; although this
means that CURRENT is the first to see new functionality, it also means
that it occasionally suffers from breakages as new features are added
and debugged.

Most FreeBSD releases are made from one of several ``STABLE'' branches.
Features are only added to these branches after some amount of testing
in CURRENT. At the moment, only one STABLE branch is under active
development; this branch is referred to as ``4-STABLE'', and all of the
FreeBSD 4.X releases were based on it. This branch has the tag RELENG_4
in the CVS repository.

FreeBSD 5.0 and 5.1 are based on the CURRENT branch. These are the first
releases from this branch in over two years (the last was FreeBSD 4.0,
in March 2000).

At some point after the release of FreeBSD 5.0, a ``5-STABLE'' branch
will be created in the FreeBSD CVS repository with the branch tag
RELENG_5. The past two stable branches (3-STABLE and 4-STABLE) were
created immediately after their respective ``dot-oh'' releases (3.0 and
4.0, respectively). In hindsight, this practice did not give sufficient
time for either CURRENT to stabilize before the new branches were
created. This in turn resulted in wasted effort porting bug fixes
between branches, as well as some architectural changes that could not
be ported between branches at all.

Therefore, the release engineering team will only create the 5-STABLE
branch in the CVS repository after we have found a relatively stable
state to use as its basis. It is likely that there will be multiple
releases in the 5.X series before this happens; we estimate that the
5-STABLE branch will be created sometime after 5.2-RELEASE.

More information on FreeBSD release engineering processes can be found
on the Release Engineering Web pages and in the ``FreeBSD Release
Engineering'' article. Specific issues for the upcoming 5-STABLE
development branch can be found in ``The Roadmap for 5-STABLE''.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 New Features

A large attraction of FreeBSD 5.X is a number of new features. These new
features and functionality generally involve large architectural changes
that were not feasible to port back to the FreeBSD 4-STABLE development
branch. (By contrast, many self-contained enhancements, such as new
device drivers or userland utilities, have already been ported.) A
brief, but not exhaustive list includes:

-   SMPng: The ``next generation'' support for SMP machines (work in
    progress). There is now partial support for multiple processors to
    be running in the kernel at the same time. This work is ongoing.

-   KSE: Kernel Scheduled Entities allow a single process to have
    multiple kernel-level threads, similar to Scheduler Activations. The
    (experimental) libkse and libthr libraries make this feature
    available to multi-threaded userland programs.

-   New architectures: Support for the sparc64 and ia64 architectures,
    in addition to the i386, pc98, and alpha.

-   GCC: The compiler toolchain is now based on GCC 3.2.2, rather than
    GCC 2.95.X.

-   MAC: Support for extensible, loadable Mandatory Access Control
    policies.

-   GEOM: A flexible framework for transformations of disk I/O requests.
    An experimental disk encryption facility has been developed based on
    GEOM.

-   FFS: The FFS filesystem now supports background fsck(8) operations
    (for faster crash recovery) and filesystem snapshots.

-   UFS2: A new UFS2 on-disk format has been added, which supports
    extended per-file attributes and larger file sizes. UFS2 is now the
    default format for newfs(8). On all platforms except for pc98,
    filesystems created from within sysinstall(8) will use UFS2 by
    default.

-   Cardbus: Support for Cardbus devices.

A more comprehensive list of new features can be found in the release
notes for FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE and FreeBSD 5.1-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Drawbacks to Early Adoption

Along with the new features of FreeBSD 5.X come some areas that can
cause problems, or at least can lead to unexpected behavior. Generally,
these come from the fact that a number of features are
works-in-progress. A partial list of these areas of difficulty includes:

-   A number of features are not yet finished. Examples from the feature
    list above include SMPng and KSE. While suitable for testing and
    experimentation, these features may not be ready for production use.

-   Because of changes in kernel data structures and ABIs/APIs,
    third-party binary device drivers will require modifications to work
    correctly under FreeBSD 5.0. There is a possibility of more minor
    ABI/API changes before the 5-STABLE branch is created.

-   Several parts of FreeBSD's base system functionality have been moved
    to the Ports Collection. Notable examples include Perl, UUCP, and
    most (but not all) games. While these programs are still supported,
    their removal from the base system may cause some confusion.

-   Some parts of the FreeBSD base system have fallen into a state of
    disrepair due to a lack of users and maintainers. These have been
    removed. Specific examples include the generation of a.out-style
    executables, XNS networking support, and the X-10 controller driver.

-   A number of ports and packages do not build or do not run correctly
    under FreeBSD 5.0, whereas they did under FreeBSD 4-STABLE.
    Generally these problems are caused by compiler toolchain changes or
    cleanups of header files.

-   Many FreeBSD 5.X features are seeing wide exposure for the first
    time. Many of these features (such as SMPng) have broad impacts on
    the kernel.

-   A certain amount of debugging and diagnostic code is still in place
    to help track down problems in FreeBSD 5.0's new features. This may
    cause FreeBSD 5.0 to perform more slowly than 4-STABLE.

-   Features are only added to the 4-STABLE development branch after a
    ``settling time'' in -CURRENT. FreeBSD 5.0 does not have the
    stabilizing influence of a -STABLE branch. (It is likely that the
    5-STABLE development branch will be created sometime after
    5.2-RELEASE.)

-   Documentation (such as the FreeBSD Handbook and FAQ) may not reflect
    changes recently made to FreeBSD 5.X.

Because a number of these drawbacks affect system stability, the release
engineering team recommends that more conservative sites and users stick
to releases based on the 4-STABLE branch until the 5.X series is more
polished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

5 Plans for the 4-STABLE Branch

The release of FreeBSD 5.0 does not mean the end of the 4-STABLE branch.
Indeed, FreeBSD 4.8 was released two months after 5.0, in April 2003.
There will most likely be at least one more release on this branch,
namely 4.9-RELEASE, currently scheduled for summer 2003. A 4.10-RELEASE
is a likely possibility as well. Future releases from this branch will
depend on several factors. The most important of these is the existence
and stability of the 5-STABLE branch. If CURRENT is not sufficiently
stable to allow the creation of a 5-STABLE branch, this may require and
permit more releases from the 4-STABLE branch. Until the last declared
release on the 4-STABLE branch, new features may be merged from HEAD at
the discretion of developers, subject to existing release engineering
policies.

To some extent, the release engineering team (as well as the developer
community as a whole) will take into account user demand for future
4-STABLE releases. This demand, however, will need to be balanced with
release engineering resources (particularly developers' time, computing
resources, and mirror archive space).

The Security Officer Team <security-officer@FreeBSD.org> will continue
to support releases made from the 4-STABLE branch in accordance with
their published policies, which can be found on the Security page on the
FreeBSD web site. Generally, the two most recent releases from any
branch will be supported with respect to security advisories and
security fixes. At its discretion, the team may support other releases
for specific issues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

6 Notes on Upgrading from FreeBSD 4.X

For those users with existing FreeBSD systems, this section offers a few
notes on upgrading a FreeBSD 4.X system to 5.X. As with any FreeBSD
upgrade, it is crucial to read the release notes and the errata for the
version in question, as well as src/UPDATING in the case of source
upgrades.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.1 Binary Upgrades

Probably the most straightforward approach is that of ``backup
everything, reformat, reinstall, and restore everything''. This
eliminates problems of incompatible or obsolete executables or
configuration files polluting the new system. It allows new filesystems
to be created to take advantage of new functionality (most notably, the
UFS2 defaults).

As of this time, the binary upgrade option in sysinstall(8) has not been
well-tested for cross-major-version upgrades. Using this feature is not
recommended. In particular, a binary upgrade will leave behind a number
of files that are present in FreeBSD 4.X but not in 5.X. These obsolete
files may create some problems.

On the i386 and pc98 platforms, a UserConfig utility exists on 4-STABLE
to allow boot-time configuration of ISA devices when booting from
installation media. Under FreeBSD 5.0, this functionality has been
replaced in part by the device.hints(5) mechanism (it allows specifying
the same parameters, but with a very different interface).

Floppy-based binary installations may require downloading a third, new
floppy image holding additional device drivers in kernel modules. This
drivers.flp floppy image will generally be found in the same location as
the usual kern.flp and mfsroot.flp floppy images.

CDROM-based installations on the i386 architecture now use a
``no-emulation'' boot loader. This allows, among other things, the use
of a GENERIC kernel, rather than the stripped-down kernel on the floppy
images. In theory, any system capable of booting the Microsoft Windows
NT 4 installation CDROMs should be able to cope with the FreeBSD 5.X
CDROMs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.2 Source Upgrades

Reading src/UPDATING is absolutely essential. The section entitled ``To
upgrade from 4.x-stable to current'' contains a step-by-step update
procedure. This procedure must be followed exactly, without making use
of the ``shortcuts'' that some users occasionally employ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.3 Common Notes

Perl has been removed from the base system, and should be installed
either from a pre-built package or from the Ports Collection. Building
Perl as a part of the base system created a number of difficulties which
made updates problematic. The base system utilities that used Perl have
either been rewritten (if still applicable) or discarded (if obsolete).
sysinstall(8) will now install the Perl package as a part of most
distribution sets, so most users will not notice this change.

It is generally possible to run old 4.X executables under 5.X, but this
requires the compat4x distribution to be installed. Thus, using old
ports may be possible.

When installing or upgrading over the top of an existing 4-STABLE-based
system, it is extremely important to clear out old header files in
/usr/include. Renaming or moving this directory before a binary
installation or an installworld is generally sufficient. If this step is
not taken, confusion may result (especially with C++ programs) as the
compiler may wind up using a mixture of obsolete and current header
files.

MAKEDEV is no longer available, nor is it required. FreeBSD 5.X uses a
device filesystem, which automatically creates device nodes on demand.
For more information, please see devfs(5).

UFS2 is the default on-disk format for file systems created using
newfs(8). For all platforms except pc98, it is also the default for file
systems created using the disk labeling screen within sysinstall(8).
Because FreeBSD 4.X only understands UFS1 (not UFS2), disk partitions
that need to be accessed by both 5.X and 4.X must be created with UFS1.
This can be specified using the -O1 option to newfs(8), or on the disk
labeling screen in sysinstall(8). This situation most often arises with
a a single machine that dual-boots FreeBSD 4.X and FreeBSD 5.X. Note
that there is no way to convert file systems between the two on-disk
formats (other than backing up, re-creating the file system, and
restoring).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

7 Summary

While FreeBSD 5.1-RELEASE contains a number of new and exciting
features, it may not be suitable for all users at this time. In this
document, we presented some background on release engineering, some of
the more notable new features of the 5.X series, and some drawbacks to
early adoption. We also presented some future plans for the 4-STABLE
development branch and some tips on upgrading for early adopters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT should subscribe to the
<current@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
