[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

FreeBSD Release Engineering Team

Links:
FreeBSD 12.4-RELEASE schedule URL:
https://www.freebsd.org/releases/12.4R/schedule/
FreeBSD 12.4-RELEASE announcement URL:
https://www.freebsd.org/releases/12.4R/announce/
FreeBSD 13.2-RELEASE schedule URL:
https://www.freebsd.org/releases/13.2R/schedule/
FreeBSD 14.0-RELEASE schedule URL:
https://www.freebsd.org/releases/14.0R/schedule/
FreeBSD development snapshots URL:
https://download.freebsd.org/snapshots/ISO-IMAGES/

Contact: FreeBSD Release Engineering Team <re@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Release Engineering Team is responsible for setting and
publishing release schedules for official project releases of FreeBSD,
announcing code freezes and maintaining the respective branches, among
other things.

During the fourth quarter of 2022, the Release Engineering Team
completed work on the 12.4-RELEASE cycle. This is the final release from
the stable/12 branch. During the release cycle, only one BETA build and
two RC (release candidate) builds were needed; overall the release cycle
went very smoothly and the release took place on December 5th.

During the fourth quarter of 2022, the Release Engineering Team
continued providing weekly development snapshot builds for the main,
stable/13, and stable/12 branches.

In the first quarter of 2023, the Release Engineering Team will start
work on the upcoming 13.2-RELEASE.

Sponsors:
Rubicon Communications, LLC ("Netgate")
The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: January 23, 2023 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
