[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/ia64 5.1-RELEASE Hardware Notes

The FreeBSD Documentation Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 Supported Processors and Motherboards

2.1 Supported Devices Overview

3 Supported Devices

3.1 Disk Controllers

3.2 Ethernet Interfaces

3.3 FDDI Interfaces

3.4 ATM Interfaces

3.5 Wireless Network Interfaces

3.6 Miscellaneous Networks

3.7 ISDN Interfaces

3.8 Serial Interfaces

3.9 Audio Devices

3.10 Camera and Video Capture Devices

3.11 USB Devices

3.12 IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Devices

3.13 Bluetooth Devices

3.14 Cryptographic Accelerators

3.15 Miscellaneous

  This is a preliminary document. It is incomplete, and in need of
  additional content. Please send additional information on IA-64
  processors, motherboards, and various devices working on FreeBSD to
  the FreeBSD IA64 porting mailing list.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This document contains the hardware compatibility notes for FreeBSD
5.1-RELEASE on the IA-64 hardware platform (also referred to as
FreeBSD/ia64 5.1-RELEASE). It lists devices known to work on this
platform, as well as some notes on boot-time kernel customization that
may be useful when attempting to configure support for new devices.

  Note: This document includes information specific to the IA-64
  hardware platform. Versions of the hardware compatibility notes for
  other architectures will differ in some details.

More information on FreeBSD/ia64 is contained on the FreeBSD/ia64
Project page.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Supported Processors and Motherboards

Currently supported processors are the Itanium and the Itanium 2.

Supported chipsets include:

-   HP zx1 (only on development branch, see the Perforce repository)

-   HP i2000

-   Intel 460GX

-   Intel E8870

Both Uniprocessor (UP) and Symmetric Multi-processor (SMP)
configurations are under active development. At this time, SMP-enabled
systems are considered less stable. The current priorities are UP fixes
to improve stability.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Supported Devices Overview

This section contains additional information about what devices may or
may not be supported by FreeBSD/ia64.

Except for the PC chipset embedded ata(4) controllers, most should work
out of the box. Eventually, all ia64-compatible ATA controllers are
expected to be fully supported. Refer to the following sections for
various disk controllers and their current status.

In general, ``PC standard'' serial ports supported by the sio(4) driver
are expected to work on Intel legacy machines, but not PA legacy
machines. The reason is that all devices on HP machines are
memory-mapped and there is no ISA device support other than the PCI
dictated VGA legacy.

In addition to sio(4) devices, the following devices fail on non-Intel
legacy machines (but should work on boxes with an Intel legacy) because
their drivers make ISA-specific assumptions that do not hold:

  ------------------ ----------------------------------
  sio(4)             No support for memory-mapped I/O
  syscons(4)         Expect BIOS, VGA probes, etc.
  pcm(4)             Probes MSS ISA ports ad nauseum
  atkbd(4), psm(4)   Fixed ISA port locations
  ------------------ ----------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Supported Devices

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/hardware/common/dev.sgml,v
1.157 2003/05/30 11:24:00 nyan Exp $

This section describes the devices currently known to be supported by
with FreeBSD on the IA-64 platform. Other configurations may also work,
but simply have not been tested yet. Feedback, updates, and corrections
to this list are encouraged.

Where possible, the drivers applicable to each device or class of
devices is listed. If the driver in question has a manual page in the
FreeBSD base distribution (most should), it is referenced here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1 Disk Controllers

IDE/ATA controllers ( ata(4) driver)

-   Acard ATP850 UDMA2, ATP860 UDMA4, ATP865 UDMA6

-   AMD 756 ATA66, 766 ATA100, 768 ATA100

-   Cenatek Rocket Drive

-   CMD 646, 648 ATA66, and 649 ATA100

-   Cypress 82C693

-   Cyrix 5530 ATA33

-   HighPoint HPT366 ATA66, HPT370 ATA100, HPT372 ATA133, HPT374 ATA133

-   Intel PIIX, PIIX3, PIIX4

-   Intel ICH ATA66, ICH2 ATA100, ICH3 ATA100, ICH4 ATA100

-   nVidia nForce ATA100, nForce2 ATA133

-   Promise ATA100 OEM chip (pdc20265)

-   Promise ATA133 OEM chip (pdc20269)

-   Promise Fasttrak-33, -66, -100, -100 TX2/TX4, -133 TX2/TX2000

-   Promise SATA150 TX2/TX4 Serial ATA/150

-   Promise Ultra-33, -66, -100, -133 TX2/TX2000/TX4000

-   ServerWorks ROSB4 ATA33

-   ServerWorks CSB5 and CSB6 ATA66/ATA100

-   Sil 0680 UDMA6

-   SiS 530, 540, 550, 620

-   SiS 630, 630S, 633, 635, 640, 645, 645DX, 648, 650, 651, 652, 655,
    658, 730, 733, 735, 740, 745, 746, 748, 750, 751, 752, 755

-   SiS 5591 ATA100

-   VIA 82C586 ATA33, 82C596 ATA66, 82C686a ATA66, 82C686b ATA100

-   VIA 8233, 8235 ATA133

Qlogic controllers and variants ( isp(4) driver)

-   Qlogic 1020, 1040 SCSI and Ultra SCSI host adapters

-   Qlogic 1240 dual Ultra SCSI controllers

-   Qlogic 1080 Ultra2 LVD and 1280 Dual Ultra2 LVD controllers

-   Qlogic 12160 Ultra3 LVD controllers

-   Qlogic 2100 and Qlogic 2200 Fibre Channel SCSI controllers

-   Qlogic 2300 and Qlogic 2312 2-Gigabit Fibre Channel SCSI controllers

-   Performance Technology SBS440 ISP1000 variants

-   Performance Technology SBS450 ISP1040 variants

-   Performance Technology SBS470 ISP2100 variants

-   Antares Microsystems P-0033 ISP2100 variants

LSI Logic Fusion/MP architecture Fiber Channel controllers (mpt driver)

-   LSI 53c1020, 53c1030

With all supported SCSI controllers, full support is provided for
SCSI-I, SCSI-II, and SCSI-III peripherals, including hard disks, optical
disks, tape drives (including DAT, 8mm Exabyte, Mammoth, and DLT),
medium changers, processor target devices and CD-ROM drives. WORM
devices that support CD-ROM commands are supported for read-only access
by the CD-ROM drivers (such as cd(4)). WORM/CD-R/CD-RW writing support
is provided by cdrecord(1), which is a part of the sysutils/cdrtools
port in the Ports Collection.

The following CD-ROM type systems are supported at this time:

-   SCSI interface (also includes ProAudio Spectrum and SoundBlaster
    SCSI) ( cd(4))

-   ATAPI IDE interface ( acd(4))

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2 Ethernet Interfaces

Intel 82557-, 82258-, 82559-, 82550- or 82562-based Fast Ethernet NICs (
fxp(4) driver)

-   Intel EtherExpress Pro/100B PCI Fast Ethernet

-   Intel InBusiness 10/100 PCI Network Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100+ Management Adapter

-   Intel Pro/100 VE Desktop Adapter

-   Intel Pro/100 M Desktop Adapter

-   Intel Pro/100 S Desktop, Server and Dual-Port Server Adapters

-   On-board Ethernet NICs on many Intel motherboards.

Gigabit Ethernet NICs based on the Broadcom BCM570x ( bge(4) driver)

-   3Com 3c996-SX, 3c996-T

-   Netgear GA302T

-   SysKonnect SK-9D21 and 9D41

Gigabit Ethernet NICs based on the Intel 82542 and 82543 controller
chips ( gx(4) and em(4) drivers), plus NICs supported by the Intel
82540EM, 82544, 82545EM, and 82546EB controller chips ( em(4) driver
only)

-   Intel PRO/1000 Gigabit Ethernet

  Note: The em(4) driver is officially supported by Intel, but is only
  supported on the i386.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.3 FDDI Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.4 ATM Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.5 Wireless Network Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.6 Miscellaneous Networks

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.7 ISDN Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.8 Serial Interfaces

``PC standard'' 8250, 16450, and 16550-based serial ports ( sio(4)
driver)

PCI-Based multi-port serial boards ( puc(4) driver)

-   Diva Serial (GSP) Multiport UART (development branch only)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.9 Audio Devices

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.10 Camera and Video Capture Devices

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.11 USB Devices

Host Controllers ( ohci(4) and uhci(4) drivers)

-   UHCI or OHCI compliant motherboard chipsets (no exceptions known)

USB 2.0 controllers using the EHCI interface ( ehci(4) driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.12 IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Devices

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.13 Bluetooth Devices

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.14 Cryptographic Accelerators

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.15 Miscellaneous

VGA-compatible video cards ( vga(4) driver)

  Note: Information regarding specific video cards and compatibility
  with XFree86 can be found at http://www.xfree86.org/.

Keyboards including:

-   PS/2 keyboards ( atkbd(4) driver)

Pointing devices including:

-   PS/2 mice and compatible devices, including many laptop pointing
    devices ( psm(4) driver)

-   Serial mice and compatible devices

  Note: moused(8) has more information on using pointing devices with
  FreeBSD. Information on using pointing devices with XFree86 can be
  found at http://www.xfree86.org/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT should subscribe to the
<current@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
