
Frequently Asked Questions About The FreeBSD Mailing Lists

Abstract

This is the FAQ for the FreeBSD mailing lists. If you are interested in
helping with this project, send email to the FreeBSD documentation
project mailing list. The latest version of this document is always
available from the FreeBSD World Wide Web server. It may also be
downloaded as one large HTML file with HTTP or as plain text,
PostScript, PDF, etc. from the FreeBSD FTP server. You may also want to
Search the FAQ.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1. Introduction

As is usual with FAQs, this document aims to cover the most frequently
asked questions concerning the FreeBSD mailing lists (and of course
answer them!). Although originally intended to reduce bandwidth and
avoid the same old questions being asked over and over again, FAQs have
become recognized as valuable information resources.

This document attempts to represent a community consensus, and as such
it can never really be authoritative. However, if you find technical
errors within this document, or have suggestions about items that should
be added, please either submit a PR, or email the FreeBSD documentation
project mailing list. Thanks.

1.1. What is the purpose of the FreeBSD mailing lists?

The FreeBSD mailing lists serve as the primary communication channels
for the FreeBSD community, covering many different topic areas and
communities of interest.

1.2. Who is the audience for the FreeBSD mailing lists?

This depends on charter of each individual list. Some lists are more
oriented to developers; some are more oriented towards the FreeBSD
community as a whole. Please see this list for the current summary.

1.3. Are the FreeBSD mailing lists open for anyone to participate?

Again, this depends on charter of each individual list. Please read the
charter of a mailing list before you post to it, and respect it when you
post. This will help everyone to have a better experience with the
lists.

If after reading the above lists, you still do not know which mailing
list to post a question to, you will probably want to post to
freebsd-questions (but see below, first).

Also note that the mailing lists have traditionally been open to
postings from non-subscribers. This has been a deliberate choice, to
help make joining the FreeBSD community an easier process, and to
encourage open sharing of ideas. However, due to past abuse by some
individuals, certain lists now have a policy where postings from
non-subscribers must be manually screened to ensure that they are
appropriate.

1.4. How can I subscribe?

You can use the Mlmmj web interface to subscribe to any of the public
lists.

1.5. How can I unsubscribe?

You can use the same interface as above; or, you can follow the
instructions that are at the bottom of every mailing list message that
is sent.

Please do not send unsubscribe messages directly to the public lists
themselves. First, this will not accomplish your goal, and second, it
will irritate the existing subscribers, and you will probably get
flamed. This is a classical mistake when using mailing lists; please try
to avoid it.

1.6. Are archives available?

Yes. Threaded archives are available here. You can also access mailman
archive and mlmmj archive directly.

1.7. Are mailing lists available in a digest format?

Yes. See the Mlmmj web interface.

2. Mailing List Etiquette

Participation in the mailing lists, like participation in any community,
requires a common basis for communication. Please make only appropriate
postings, and follow common rules of etiquette.

2.1. What should I do before I post?

You have already taken the most important step by reading this document.
However, if you are new to FreeBSD, you may first need to familiarize
yourself with the software, and all the social history around it, by
reading the numerous books and articles that are available. Items of
particular interest include the FreeBSD Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
document, the FreeBSD Handbook, and the articles How to get best results
from the FreeBSD-questions mailing list, Explaining BSD, and FreeBSD
First Steps.

It is always considered bad form to ask a question that is already
answered in the above documents. This is not because the volunteers who
work on this project are particularly mean people, but after a certain
number of times answering the same questions over and over again,
frustration begins to set in. This is particularly true if there is an
existing answer to the question that is already available. Always keep
in mind that almost all of the work done on FreeBSD is done by
volunteers, and that we are only human.

2.2. What constitutes an inappropriate posting?

-   Postings must be in accordance with the charter of the mailing list.

-   Personal attacks are discouraged. As good net-citizens, we should
    try to hold ourselves to high standards of behavior.

-   Spam is not allowed, ever. The mailing lists are actively processed
    to ban offenders to this rule.

2.3. What is considered proper etiquette when posting to the mailing lists?

-   Please wrap lines at 75 characters, since not everyone uses fancy
    GUI mail reading programs.

-   Please respect the fact that bandwidth is not infinite. Not everyone
    reads email through high-speed connections, so if your posting
    involves something like the content of config.log or an extensive
    stack trace, please consider putting that information up on a
    website somewhere and just provide a URL to it. Remember, too, that
    these postings will be archived indefinitely, so huge postings will
    simply inflate the size of the archives long after their purpose has
    expired.

-   Format your message so that it is legible, and PLEASE DO NOT
    SHOUT!!!!!. Do not underestimate the effect that a poorly formatted
    mail message has, and not just on the FreeBSD mailing lists. Your
    mail message is all that people see of you, and if it is poorly
    formatted, badly spelled, full of errors, and/or has lots of
    exclamation points, it will give people a poor impression of you.

-   Please use an appropriate human language for a particular mailing
    list. Many non-English mailing lists are available.

    For the ones that are not, we do appreciate that many people do not
    speak English as their first language, and we try to make allowances
    for that. It is considered particularly poor form to criticize
    non-native speakers for spelling or grammatical errors. FreeBSD has
    an excellent track record in this regard; please, help us to uphold
    that tradition.

-   Please use a standards-compliant Mail User Agent (MUA). A lot of
    badly formatted messages come from bad mailers or badly configured
    mailers. The following mailers are known to send out badly formatted
    messages without you finding out about them:

    -   exmh

    -   Microsoft® Exchange

    -   Microsoft® Outlook®

        Try not to use MIME: a lot of people use mailers which do not
        get on very well with MIME.

-   Make sure your time and time zone are set correctly. This may seem a
    little silly, since your message still gets there, but many of the
    people on these mailing lists get several hundred messages a day.
    They frequently sort the incoming messages by subject and by date,
    and if your message does not come before the first answer, they may
    assume that they missed it and not bother to look.

-   A lot of the information you need to supply is the output of
    programs, such as dmesg(8), or console messages, which usually
    appear in /var/log/messages. Do not try to copy this information by
    typing it in again; not only it is a real pain, but you are bound to
    make a mistake. To send log file contents, either make a copy of the
    file and use an editor to trim the information to what is relevant,
    or cut and paste into your message. For the output of programs like
    dmesg, redirect the output to a file and include that. For example,

        % dmesg > /tmp/dmesg.out

    This redirects the information to the file /tmp/dmesg.out.

-   When using cut-and-paste, please be aware that some such operations
    badly mangle their messages. This is of particular concern when
    posting contents of Makefiles, where tab is a significant character.
    This is a very common, and very annoying, problem with submissions
    to the Problem Reports database. Makefiles with tabs changed to
    either spaces, or the annoying =3B escape sequence, create a great
    deal of aggravation for committers.

2.4. What are the special etiquette consideration when replying to an existing posting on the mailing lists?

-   Please include relevant text from the original message. Trim it to
    the minimum, but do not overdo it. It should still be possible for
    somebody who did not read the original message to understand what
    you are talking about.

    This is especially important for postings of the type "yes, I see
    this too", where the initial posting was dozens or hundreds of
    lines.

-   Use some technique to identify which text came from the original
    message, and which text you add. A common convention is to prepend
    “>” to the original message. Leaving white space after the “>” and
    leaving empty lines between your text and the original text both
    make the result more readable.

-   Please ensure that the attributions of the text you are quoting is
    correct. People can become offended if you attribute words to them
    that they themselves did not write.

-   Please do not top post. By this, we mean that if you are replying to
    a message, please put your replies after the text that you copy in
    your reply.

    -   A: Because it reverses the logical flow of conversation.

    -   Q: Why is top posting frowned upon?

        (Thanks to Randy Bush for the joke.)

3. Recurring Topics On The Mailing Lists

Participation in the mailing lists, like participation in any community,
requires a common basis for communication. Many of the mailing lists
presuppose a knowledge of the Project’s history. In particular, there
are certain topics that seem to regularly occur to newcomers to the
community. It is the responsibility of each poster to ensure that their
postings do not fall into one of these categories. By doing so, you will
help the mailing lists to stay on-topic, and probably save yourself
being flamed in the process.

The best method to avoid this is to familiarize yourself with the
mailing list archives, to help yourself understand the background of
what has gone before. In this, the mailing list search interface is
invaluable. (If that method does not yield useful results, please
supplement it with a search with your favorite major search engine).

By familiarizing yourself with the archives, not only will you learn
what topics have been discussed before, but also how discussion tends to
proceed on that list, who the participants are, and who the target
audience is. These are always good things to know before you post to any
mailing list, not just a FreeBSD mailing list.

There is no doubt that the archives are quite extensive, and some
questions recur more often than others, sometimes as followups where the
subject line no longer accurately reflects the new content.
Nevertheless, the burden is on you, the poster, to do your homework to
help avoid these recurring topics.

4. What Is A "Bikeshed"?

Literally, a bikeshed is a small outdoor shelter into which one may
store one’s two-wheeled form of transportation. However, in FreeBSD
parlance, the term refers to topics that are simple enough that (nearly)
anyone can offer an opinion about, and often (nearly) everyone does. The
genesis of this term is explained in more detail in this document. You
simply must have a working knowledge of this concept before posting to
any FreeBSD mailing list.

More generally, a bikeshed is a topic that will tend to generate
immediate meta-discussions and flames if you have not read up on their
past history.

Please help us to keep the mailing lists as useful for as many people as
possible by avoiding bikesheds whenever you can. Thanks.

5. Acknowledgments

Greg Lehey <grog@FreeBSD.org>

    Original author of most of the material on mailing list etiquette,
    taken from the article on How to get best results from the
    FreeBSD-questions mailing list.

Mark Linimon <linimon@FreeBSD.org>

    Creation of the rough draft of this FAQ.

