[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 9.1-RELEASE Installation Instructions

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This article gives some brief instructions on installing FreeBSD
9.1-RELEASE and upgrading the systems running earlier releases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Installing FreeBSD

The “Installing FreeBSD” chapter of the FreeBSD Handbook provides more
in-depth information about the installation program itself, including a
guided walk-through with screenshots.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Upgrading FreeBSD

If you are upgrading from a previous release of FreeBSD, please read
upgrading section in the Release Notes for notable incompatibilities
carefully.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Upgrading from Source

The procedure for doing a source code based update is described in
https://doc.FreeBSD.org/en/books/handbook/book/#synching and
https://doc.FreeBSD.org/en/books/handbook/book/#makeworld.

For SVN use the releng/9.1 branch which will be where any upcoming
Security Advisories or Errata Notices will be applied. The branch tag to
use for updating the source is RELENG_9_1 for CVS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Upgrading Using "FreeBSD Update"

The freebsd-update(8) utility supports binary upgrades of i386 and amd64
systems running earlier FreeBSD releases. Systems running
7.[34]-RELEASE, 8.[12]-RELEASE, 9.0-RELEASE, 9.1-BETA1, or 9.1-RC[123]
can upgrade as follows:

First, ensure that your current system is up to date; a change was
recently made to freebsd-update(8) (Errata Notice
FreeBSD-EN-12:01.freebsd-update) which is needed in order to upgrade to
FreeBSD 9.1-RELEASE.

    # freebsd-update fetch
    # freebsd-update install

Now the freebsd-update(8) utility can fetch bits belonging to
9.1-RELEASE. During this process freebsd-update(8) will ask for help in
merging configuration files.

    # freebsd-update upgrade -r 9.1-RELEASE

Due to changes in the way that FreeBSD is packaged on the release media,
two complications may arise in this process if upgrading from FreeBSD
7.x or 8.x:

1.  The FreeBSD, which previously could appear in either /boot/kernel or
    /boot/GENERIC, now only appears as /boot/kernel. As a result, any
    kernel appearing in /boot/GENERIC will be deleted. Please carefully
    read the output printed by freebsd-update(8) and confirm that an
    updated kernel will be placed into /boot/kernel before proceeding
    beyond this point.

2.  The FreeBSD source tree in /usr/src (if present) will be deleted.
    (Normally the freebsd-update(8) utility will update a source tree,
    but in this case the changes in release packaging result in the
    freebsd-update(8) utility not recognizing that the source tree from
    the old release and the source tree from the new release correspond
    to the same part of FreeBSD.)

    # freebsd-update install

The system must now be rebooted with the newly installed kernel before
the non-kernel components are updated.

    # shutdown -r now

After rebooting, freebsd-update(8) needs to be run again to install the
new userland components:

    # freebsd-update install

At this point, users of systems being upgraded from FreeBSD 8.2-RELEASE
or earlier will be prompted by freebsd-update(8) to rebuild all
third-party applications (e.g., ports installed from the ports tree) due
to updates in system libraries.

After updating installed third-party applications (and again, only if
freebsd-update(8) printed a message indicating that this was necessary),
run freebsd-update(8) again so that it can delete the old (no longer
used) system libraries:

    # freebsd-update install

Finally, reboot into 9.1-RELEASE

    # shutdown -r now

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: January 31, 2021 by Sergio Carlavilla Delgado

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
