[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Realtek Wireless driver support

Links:
rtw88 status FreeBSD wiki page URL: https://wiki.freebsd.org/WiFi/Rtw88
rtw89 status FreeBSD wiki page URL: https://wiki.freebsd.org/WiFi/Rtw89

Contact: Bjoern A. Zeeb <bz@FreeBSD.org>

While the Intel Wireless driver update project is the main driver behind
the work to bring support for newer chipsets and eventually newer IEEE
802.11 standards support, there is also an ongoing effort to support
more drivers. The next two drivers in the (already longer) queue are
Realtek’s rtw88 and rtw89.

While the initial driver porting efforts for rtw88 and rtw89 happened on
personal time, the LinuxKPI integration has to be done more and more
along the Intel wireless driver work and so thanks are also due to The
FreeBSD Foundation.

The rtw88 driver has started to work on some machines with less than 4GB
of main memory and was committed to the FreeBSD git repository for
broader testing. While our version of the driver is aware of these
limitations, the problem is currently assumed to be outside the driver
in the interactions with LinuxKPI and busdma.

The rtw89 driver has happily started to send packets and has problems
receiving frames at this point. Further investigation will happen as
soon as rtw88 is sorted out and it is expected that rtw89 will then also
timely follow into FreeBSD’s git repository.

The currently known requirements to compile both drivers have mostly
gone into stable/13 and releng/13.1 already.

For the latest state of the development, please check the referenced
wiki pages and follow the freebsd-wireless mailing list.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation (partly)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: June 10, 2022 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
