[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

KDE on FreeBSD

Links:
KDE FreeBSD URL: https://freebsd.kde.org/
KDE Community FreeBSD URL: https://community.kde.org/FreeBSD

Contact: Adriaan de Groot <kde@FreeBSD.org>

The KDE on FreeBSD project aims to package all of the software produced
by the KDE Community for the FreeBSD ports tree. The software includes a
full desktop environment called KDE Plasma, graphics applications,
instant-messengers, a video-editing suite, as well as a tea timer and
hundreds of other applications that can be used on any FreeBSD machine.

The KDE team (kde@) is part of desktop@ and x11@ as well, building the
software stack to make FreeBSD beautiful and usable as a daily-driver
graphics-based desktop machine.

The KDE Frameworks have a monthly release cycle; KDE Plasma and the rest
of KDE software run on a quarterly cycle plus monthly bugfixes. All of
those releases landed in ports in a timely manner. Around KDE there are
several hundred other applications with their own releases, of which
notable or new ones are:

-   deskutils/calindori, deskutils/kongress, net-im/kaidan,
    deskutils/semantik and graphics/kgeotag

-   net-im/ruqola and net-im/neochat for Rocket and Matrix
    instant-messaging, respectively

-   audio/amarok, the one-time favorite KDE music player

Infrastructure work improved the way Qt5 ports install- and un-install
changes to the global header qconfig-modules.h. CMake releases landed
with distressing regularity, and various low-level things like
devel/libphonenumber and graphics/poppler were updated as needed.

The big issue in the Qt stack on FreeBSD is Qt5-WebEngine, which is
based on Chromium. Like Chromium itself (upstream), it has a tangled
mess of a build system based on Python 2.7. The scheduled removal of
Python 2.7 and ports that depend on it is a sword looming over a large
chunk of the Qt and KDE stack. Some resolution may be forthcoming in the
form of WebEngine-less ports, but the real effort is in trying to get
WebEngine to build with Python3.

More detailed descriptions of the updates in this quarter are available
here (part 1) and here (part 2).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 1, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
