[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Policies of the Ports Management Team: Maintainers and Committers

These are the time periods that apply to maintainer and committer
responses to issues brought to their attention via email.

Problem Report (PR) Timeouts

The time limit for a maintainer to respond to a PR is two weeks. After
that period, if it is a minor change, any ports committer can commit the
change. If it is a major change (e.g., would require a regression run),
please contact portmgr first.

We have an add-on to the Problem Reports database known as the
auto-assigner, which attempts to automatically notify maintainers of
PRs; however, it depends on the Summary containing category/portname. In
general, various people attempt to catch and fix cases where it does not
work, but you should not assume so. Therefore, please check to see
whether or not the maintainer knows about the PR before declaring a
timeout. You can generally tell this from the Audit-Trail and Cc: lines
in the PR.

Maintainer Reset

A maintainer who does not respond to any port issues for 3 months may be
reset by any ports committer. If you are a committer and concerned about
whether you are doing the right thing, please contact portmgr.

This period may be shortened by portmgr if the email address returns
with a hard bounce. In this case, it is probably desirable to reset all
the maintainer’s ports and check the status of any PRs.

Commit Privileges

Ports committers who are not active for one year will lose commit
privileges. portmgr will contact the committer by email before invoking
this limit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: February 21, 2021 by Danilo G. Baio

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
