[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 8.4-RELEASE Installation Instructions

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2013 The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD:
releng/8.4/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/installation/article.xml 249128
2013-04-05 04:08:03Z hrs $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

SPARC, SPARC64, SPARCengine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. SPARC
International, Inc owns all of the SPARC trademarks and under licensing
agreements allows the proper use of these trademarks by its members.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “®” symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This article gives some brief instructions on installing FreeBSD
  8.4-RELEASE and upgrading the systems running earlier releases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Installing FreeBSD

For instructions on installing FreeBSD, please see Chapter 2 of The
FreeBSD Handbook. It provides a complete installation walk-through for
users new to FreeBSD, and can be found online at:
http://www.FreeBSD.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/install.html

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Upgrading FreeBSD

2.1 Upgrading from Source

The procedure for doing a source code based update is described in
http://www.FreeBSD.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/synching.html
and
http://www.FreeBSD.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook//makeworld.html.

The branch tag to use for updating the source is RELENG_8_4 for CVS. For
SVN use releng/8.4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Upgrading Using “FreeBSD Update”

The freebsd-update(8) utility supports binary upgrades of i386 and amd64
systems running earlier FreeBSD releases. Systems running
7.[01234]-RELEASE, 8.[0123]-RELEASE, 8.4-BETA1, or 8.4-RC[12] can
upgrade as follows:

    # freebsd-update upgrade -r 8.4-RELEASE

During this process, FreeBSD Update may ask the user to help by merging
some configuration files or by confirming that the automatically
performed merging was done correctly.

    # freebsd-update install

The system must be rebooted with the newly installed kernel before
continuing.

    # shutdown -r now

After rebooting, freebsd-update(8) needs to be run again to install the
new userland components:

    # freebsd-update install

At this point, users of systems being upgraded from FreeBSD 7.4-RELEASE
or earlier will be prompted by freebsd-update to rebuild all third-party
applications (e.g., ports installed from the ports tree) due to updates
in system libraries.

After updating installed third-party applications (and again, only if
freebsd-update(8) printed a message indicating that this was necessary),
run freebsd-update(8) again so that it can delete the old (no longer
used) system libraries:

    # freebsd-update install

Finally, reboot into 8.4-RELEASE

    # shutdown -r now

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
