[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

Â 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 11.0-RELEASE Release Notes

Abstract

The release notes for FreeBSD 11.0-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system on the 11.0-STABLE development
line. This document lists applicable security advisories that were
issued since the last release, as well as significant changes to the
FreeBSD kernel and userland. Some brief remarks on upgrading are also
presented.

Table of Contents

-   Introduction

-   Important Notes

    -   User-facing Changes

-   Upgrading from Previous Releases of FreeBSD

-   Userland

    -   Userland Configuration Changes

    -   Userland Application Changes

    -   Contributed Software

    -   Installation and Configuration Tools

    -   /etc/rc.d Scripts

    -   /etc/periodic Scripts

    -   Runtime Libraries and API

    -   ABI Compatibility

-   Kernel

    -   Kernel Bug Fixes

    -   Kernel Configuration

    -   System Tuning and Controls

-   Devices and Drivers

    -   Device Drivers

    -   Storage Drivers

    -   Network Drivers

-   Hardware Support

    -   Hardware Support

    -   Virtualization Support

    -   ARM Support

-   Storage

    -   General Storage

    -   Networked Storage

    -   ZFS

    -   geom(4)

-   Boot Loader Changes

    -   Boot Loader Changes

-   Networking

    -   Network Protocols

-   Release Engineering and Integration

    -   Integration Changes

Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 11.0-RELEASE. It
describes recently added, changed, or deleted features of FreeBSD. It
also provides some notes on upgrading from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 11.0-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at https://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/ or any of its mirrors.
More information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the Obtaining FreeBSD' appendix to the FreeBSD
Handbook.

All users are encouraged to consult the release errata before installing
FreeBSD. The errata document is updated with "late-breaking" information
discovered late in the release cycle or after the release. Typically, it
contains information on known bugs, security advisories, and corrections
to documentation. An up-to-date copy of the errata for FreeBSD
11.0-RELEASE can be found on the FreeBSD Web site.

This document describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 10.3-RELEASE. In general, changes described here are
unique to the 11.0-STABLE branch unless specifically marked as MERGED
features.

Typical release note items document recent security advisories issued
after 10.3-RELEASE, new drivers or hardware support, new commands or
options, major bug fixes, or contributed software upgrades. They may
also list changes to major ports/packages or release engineering
practices. Clearly the release notes cannot list every single change
made to FreeBSD between releases; this document focuses primarily on
security advisories, user-visible changes, and major architectural
improvements.

Important Notes

This section lists important information for those upgrading from prior
FreeBSD releases.

User-facing Changes

As of r303719, OpenSSH DSA key generation has been disabled by default.
It is important to update OpenSSH keys prior to upgrading. Additionally,
Protocol 1 support has been removed.

Upgrading from Previous Releases of FreeBSD

[amd64,i386] Binary upgrades between RELEASE versions (and snapshots of
the various security branches) are supported using the freebsd-update(8)
utility. The binary upgrade procedure will update unmodified userland
utilities, as well as unmodified GENERIC kernels distributed as a part
of an official FreeBSD release. The freebsd-update(8) utility requires
that the host being upgraded have Internet connectivity.

Source-based upgrades (those based on recompiling the FreeBSD base
system from source code) from previous versions are supported, using the
instructions in /usr/src/UPDATING.

For information on upgrading via freebsd-update(8), please see the
binary upgrading section in the Installation page.

Important:
Upgrading FreeBSD should only be attempted after backing up all data and
configuration files.

Userland

This section covers changes and additions to userland applications,
contributed software, and system utilities.

Userland Configuration Changes

The default newsyslog.conf(5) now includes files in the
/etc/newsyslog.conf.d/ and /usr/local/etc/newsyslog.conf.d/ directories
for newsyslog(8). (r266463)

The mailwrapper(8) utility has been updated to use mailer.conf(5) from
the LOCALBASE environment variable, which defaults to /usr/local if
unset. (r270675)

The MK_ARM_EABI src.conf(5) option has been removed and is now the only
supported ABI for FreeBSD/arm. (r272350)

The ntp suite has been updated to version 4.2.8p8. (r301247)

/etc/ntp/leap-seconds has been updated to version 3676752000. (r301247)

The WITH_SYSTEM_COMPILER src.conf(5) option is enabled by default.
(r302177)

Userland Application Changes

When unable to load a kernel module with kldload(8), a message informing
to view output of dmesg(8) is now printed, opposed to the previous
output "Exec format error.". (r260594)

The pciconf(8) utility can now identify PCI devices that are attached to
a driver to be identified by their device name instead of just the
selector. Additionally, the -l flag now accepts an optional device
argument to list details about a single device. (r260910)

A new flag, "onifconsole" has been added to /etc/ttys. This allows the
system to provide a login prompt via serial console if the device is an
active kernel console, otherwise it is equivalent to off. (r260913)

Support for displaying VPD for PCI devices via pciconf(8) has been
added. (r260926)

The ping(8) utility has been updated to use the Capsicum framework to
drop priviliges, protecting against malicious network packets. (r261498)

The ps(1) utility has been updated to include the -J flag, used to
filter output by matching jail(8) IDs and names. Additionally, argument
0 can be used to -J to only list processes running on the host system.
(r265229)

The top(1) utility has been updated to filter by jail(8) ID or name, in
followup to the ps(1) change in r265229. (r265249)

The pmcstat(8) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -l, which
ends event collection after the specified number of seconds. (r266209)

The ps(1) utility has been updated to include a new keyword, "tracer",
which displays the PID of the tracing process. (r270745)

Support for adding empty partitions has been added to the mkimg(1)
utility. (r271482)

The primes(6) utility has been updated to correctly enumerate prime
numbers between 4295098369 and 3825123056546413050. Prior to this
change, it was possible for returned values to be incorrectly identified
as prime numbers. (r272166)

The mkimg(1) utility has been updated to include three options used to
print information about mkimg(1) itself: (r272198)

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Option                            | Output                            |
+===================================+===================================+
| --version                         | The current version of the        |
|                                   | mkimg(1) utility                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| --formats                         | The disk image file formats       |
|                                   | supported by mkimg(1)             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| --schemes                         | The partition schemes supported   |
|                                   | by mkimg(1)                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Userland ctf(5) support in dtrace(1) has been added. With this change,
dtrace(1) is able to resolve type info for function and USDT probe
arguments, and function return values. (r272488)

The elfdump(1) utility has been updated to support capability mode
provided by capsicum(4). (r274960)

The fstyp(8) utility has been added, which is used to determine the
filesystem on a specified device. (r275680) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD
Foundation)

The libedit library has been updated to support UTF-8, which
additionally provides unicode support to sh(1). (r276881)

The mkimg(1) utility has been updated to support the MBR EFI partition
type. (r276893) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The ptrace(2) system call has been updated include support for Altivec
registers on FreeBSD/powerpc. (r277166)

A new device control utility, devctl(8) has been added, which allows
making administrative changes to individual devices, such as attaching
and detaching drivers, and enabling and disabling devices. The devctl(8)
utility uses the new devctl(3) library. (r278320)

The netstat(1) utility has been updated to use libxo(3) to optionally
generate machine-readable output. (r279122) (Sponsored by Juniper
Networks, Inc.)

A new flag, -c, has been added to the mkimg(1) utility, which allows
specifying the capacity of the target disk image. (r279139)

The UEFI Secure Boot signing utility, uefisign(8) utility has been
added. (r279315) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The freebsd-update(8) utility has been updated to prevent fetching
updated binary patches when a previous upgrade has not been thoroughly
completed. (r279571) (Sponsored by ScaleEngine, Inc.)

A regression in the libarchive(3) library that would prevent a directory
from being included in the archive when --one-file-system is used has
been fixed. (r280870)

The ar(1) utility has been updated to set
ARCHIVE_EXTRACT_SECURE_SYMLINKS and ARCHIVE_EXTRACT_SECURE_NODOTDOT to
disallow directory traversal when extracting an archive, similar to
tar(1). (r281311) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

A race condition in wc(1) that would cause final results to be sent to
stderr(4) when receiving the SIGINFO signal has been fixed. (r281617)

The chflags(1), chgrp(1), chmod(1), and chown(8) utilities now affect
symbolic links when the -R flag is specified, as documented in
symlink(7). (r282208) (Sponsored by Multiplay)

The date(1) utility has been updated to print the modification time of
the file passed as an argument to the -r flag, improving compatibility
with the GNU date(1) utility behavior. (r282608)

The pw(8) utility has been updated with a new flag, -R, that sets the
root directory within which the utility will operate. (r283961)

The lockstat(1) utility has been updated with several improvements:
(r284297) (Sponsored by ClusterHQ)

-   Spin locks are now reported as the amount of time spinning, instead
    of loop iterations.

-   Reader locks are now recognized as adaptive that can spin on
    FreeBSD.

-   Lock aquisition events for successful reader try-lock events are now
    reported.

-   Spin and block events are now reported before lock acquisition
    events.

The fstyp(8) utility has been updated to be able to detect zfs(8) and
geli(8) filesystems. (r284589) (Sponsored by ScaleEngine, Inc.)

The mkimg(1) utility has been updated to include support for NTFS
filesystems in both MBR and GPT partitioning schemes. (r284883)

The quota(1) utility has been updated to include support for IPv6.
(r285253)

The jexec(8) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -l, which
ensures a clean environment in the target jail when used. Additionally,
jexec(8) will run a shell within the target jail when run no commands
are specified. (r285420)

The w(1) utility has been updated to display the full IPv6 remote
address of the host from which a user is connected. (r285550)

The jail(8) framework has been updated to allow mounting linprocfs(5)
and linsysfs(5) within a jail. (r285685)

The patch(1) utility has been updated to include a new option to the -V
flag, none, which disables backup file creation when applying a patch.
(r285772) (Sponsored by EMC / Isilon Storage Division)

The ar(1) utility now enables deterministic mode (-D) by default. This
behavior can be disabled by specifying the -U flag. (r286010) (Sponsored
by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The xargs(1) utility has been updated to allow specifying 0 as an
argument to the -P (parallel mode) flag, which allows creating as many
concurrent processes as possible. (r286289) (Sponsored by ScaleEngine,
Inc.)

The patch(1) utility has been updated to remove the automatic checkout
feature. (r286795)

The wireless network stack has been modified to no longer show physical
wireless devices by default. In order to view available wireless devices
on the system, run sysctl net.wlan.devices. (r287197) (Sponsored by
Netflix, Nginx, Inc.)

A new utility, sesutil(8), has been added, which is used to manage
ses(4) (SCSI Environmental Services) devices. (r287473) (Sponsored by
Gandi.net)

The pciconf(8) utility has been updated to use the PCI ID database from
the misc/pciids package, if present, falling back to the PCI ID database
in the FreeBSD base system. (r287522)

The resolver library has been updated to reload /etc/resolv.conf if the
modification time has changed. (r289315) (Sponsored by Dell, Inc.)

The uuencode(1) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -r,
which when used will generate raw output similar the uudecode(1) -r
flag. (r297678)

By default the ifconfig(8) utility will set the default regulatory
domain to FCC on wireless interfaces. As a result, newly created
wireless interfaces with default settings will have less chance to
violate country-specific regulations. (r300738)

A bug in the ul(1) utility that caused lines to be truncated at 512
characters has been fixed. (r302558)

Contributed Software

The binutils suite of utilities has been updated to include upstream
patches that add new relocations for powerpc support. (r275718)

The ELF Tool Chain has been updated to upstream revision r3477.
(r300698) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The texinfo utility and info pages were removed from the base system.
The print/texinfo port should be installed on systems where info pages
are needed. (r276551)

The ELF object manipulation tools addr2line, c++filt, objcopy, nm,
readelf, size, strip, and strings were switched to the versions from the
ELF Tool Chain project. (r276796) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The xz(1) utility has been updated to support multi-threaded
compression. (r278433)

The nvi(1) editor and related utilities have been updated to version
2.1.3. (r281373)

The wpa_supplicant(8) and hostapd(8) utilities have been updated to
version 2.4. (r281806)

bmake has been updated to version 20150606. (r284254)

Sendmail has been updated to 8.15.2. Starting with FreeBSD 11.0 and
sendmail 8.15, sendmail uses uncompressed IPv6 addresses by default,
i.e., they will not contain "::". For example, instead of "::1", it will
be "0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1". This permits a zero subnet to have a more specific
match, such as different map entries for IPv6:0:0 versus IPv6:0. This
change requires that configuration data (including maps, files, classes,
custom ruleset, etc.) must use the same format, so make certain such
configuration data is in place before upgrading. As a very simple check
search for patterns like 'IPv6:[0-9a-fA-F:]*::' and 'IPv6::'. To return
to the old behavior, set the m4 option confUSE_COMPRESSED_IPV6_ADDRESSES
or the cf option UseCompressedIPv6Addresses. (r285229)

The tcpdump(1) utility has been updated to version 4.7.4. (r285275)

The ssh(1) utility has been updated to re-implement hostname
canonicalization before locating the host in known_hosts. (r285642)
(Sponsored by Dell, Inc.)

The libarchive(3) library has been updated to properly skip a sparse
file entry in a tar(1) file, which would previously produce errors.
(r285972)

The apr library used by svnlite(1) has been updated to version 1.5.2.
(r286503)

The serf library used by svnlite(1) has been updated to version 1.3.8.
(r286505)

The acpi(4) subsystem has been updated to version 20150818. (r287168)

The unbound(8) utility has been updated to version 1.5.4. (r287917)

The nc(1) utility has been updated to the OpenBSD 5.8 version. (r288303)

Timezone data files have been updated to version 2015g. (r290697)

The xz(1) utility has been updated to version 5.2.2. (r291125)

The mandoc(1) utility has been updated to version 20160116. (r292257)

OpenBSM has been updated to version 1.2 alpha 4. (r292432)

Clang has been updated to version 3.8.0. (r296417)

LLVM has been updated to version 3.8.0. (r296417)

LLDB has been updated to version 3.8.0. (r296417)

libc++ has been updated to version 3.8.0. (r296417)

The compiler_rt utility has been updated to version 3.8.0. (r296417)

The resolvconf(8) utility has been updated to version 3.7.3. (r296190)
(Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

OpenSSH has been updated to 7.2p2. (r296633)

The byacc(1) utility has been updated to version 20160324. (r297276)

The sqlite3 library used by svnlite(1) and kerberos(8) has been updated
to version 3.12.1. (r298161)

libucl has been updated to version 0.8.0. (r298166)

The svnlite(1) utility has been updated to version 1.9.4. (r298845)

ACPICA has been updated to version 20160527. (r300879)

The libblacklist(3) library and applications have been ported from the
NetBSD Project. Packet filtering support for the pf(4) packet filtering
systems has been implemented. The blacklist system provides the
blacklistd daemon, the helper script blacklistd-helper to make changes
to the running packet filter system and the blacklistctl control
program. A selection of system daemons, including: fingerd, ftpd,
rlogind, and rshd have been modified to support sending notifications to
the blacklistd daemon. (r301169) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The jemalloc(3) library has been updated to version 4.2.1. (r301718)

Support for the ipfw(4) packet filter has been added to the
blacklistd-helper script. (r301736) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD
Foundation)

Support for the ipfilter(4) packet filter has been added to the
blacklistd-helper script. (r301843) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD
Foundation)

The file(1) utility has been updated to version 5.28. (r302221)

SSHv1 support has been removed from OpenSSH. (r303716)

Support for DSA is disabled by default in OpenSSH. (r303719)

OpenSSL has been updated to version 1.0.2i. (r306198)

Installation and Configuration Tools

The bsdinstall(8) partition editor and sade(8) utility have been updated
to include native ZFS support. (r271539)

The FreeBSD installation utility, bsdinstall(8), has been updated to set
the canmount zfs(8) property to off for the /var dataset, preventing the
contents of directories within /var from conflicting when using multiple
boot environments, such as that provided by sysutils/beadm. (r272274)

The bsdconfig(8) utility has been updated to skip the initial tzsetup(8)
UTC versus wall-clock time prompt when run in a virtual machine,
determined when the kern.vm_guest sysctl(8) is set to 1. (r274394)

The bsdinstall(8) utility has been updated to use the new dpv(3) library
to display progress when extracting the FreeBSD distributions. (r275874)

Support for detecting and implementing aligning partitions on 1Mb
boundaries has been added to bsdinstall(8). (r285557) (Sponsored by
ScaleEngine, Inc.)

Support for detecting and implementing a workaround for various laptops
and motherboards that do not boot properly from GPT-partitioned disks
has been added to bsdinstall(8). Additionally, the active flag will be
set on the partition when needed. (r285679) (Sponsored by ScaleEngine,
Inc.)

Support for selecting the partitioning scheme when installing on the UFS
filesystem has been added to bsdinstall(8). (r285679) (Sponsored by
ScaleEngine, Inc.)

The bsdinstall(8) utility now supports a "BIOS+UEFI option during
installation, supporting systems with UEFI or BIOS/CSM capability.
(r298243)

The bsdinstall(8) utility has been updated to include various system
hardening options during installation. (r303447)

/etc/rc.d Scripts

The rc(8) subsystem has been updated to allow configuring services in
${LOCALBASE}/etc/rc.conf.d/. If LOCALBASE is unset, it defaults to
/usr/local. (r270676)

A new rc(8) script, growfs, has been added, which will resize the root
filesystem to fill the device on boot if /firstboot exists and
growfs_enable is enabled in rc.conf(5). (r273955)

The mrouted rc(8) script has been removed from the base system. An
equivalent script is available from the net/mrouted port. (r275299)

The service(8) utility has been updated to honor entries within
/etc/rc.conf.d/. (r287576) (Sponsored by ScaleEngine, Inc.)

Two new subcommands have been added to the rc(8) subsystem. describe
shows an rc scriptâs description, and extracommands shows any
non-standard commands present in an rc script, like reload, configtest,
or keygen. (r298515)

/etc/periodic Scripts

The daily periodic(8) script 110.clean-tmps has been updated to avoid
crossing filesystem mount boundaries when cleaning files in /tmp.
(r271321)

A new periodic(8) script, 510.status-world-kernel, has been added, which
evaluates the running userland and kernel versions from the uname(1) -U
and -K arguments, and prints an error if the system userland and kernel
are not in sync. (r277216) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

Runtime Libraries and API

The Blowfish crypt(3) default format has been changed to $2b$. (r265995)

The readline(3) library is now statically linked in software within the
base system, and the shared library is no longer installed, allowing the
Ports Collection to use a modern version of the library. (r268461)

The strptime(3) library has been updated to add support for POSIX-2001
features %U and %W. (r272273)

The dl_iterate_phdr(3) library has been changed to always return the
path name of the ELF object in the dlpi_name structure member. (r272848)
(Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The libxo(3) library has been imported to the base system. (r273562)
(Sponsored by Juniper Networks, Inc.)

A userland library for Chelsio Terminator 5 based iWARP cards has been
added, allowing userland RDMA applications to work over compatible NICs.
(r273806) (Sponsored by Chelsio Communications)

The gpio(3) library has been added, providing a wrapper around the
gpio(4) kernel interface. (r274987)

The procctl(2) system call has been updated to include a facility for
non-http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=init&sektion=8&manpath=freebsd-release-ports[init(8)]
processes to be declared as the reaper of child processes and their
decendants. (r275800) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The futimens() and utimensat() system calls have been added. See
utimensat(2) for more information. (r277610)

The elf(3) compile-time dependency has been removed from dtri.o, which
allows adding DTrace probes to userland applications and libraries
without also linking against elf(3). (r278934)

The setmode(3) function has been updated to consistently set errno on
failure. (r279186)

The qsort(3)-related functions have been updated to be able to handle
32-bit aligned data on 64-bit platforms, also providing a significant
improvement in 32-bit workloads. (r279663)

Several standard include headers have been updated to make use of gcc
attributes, such as result_use_check(), alloc_size(), and __nonnull().
(r281130]

Support for file verification in MAC has been added. (r281845)

The libgomp library is now only built when building GCC from the base
system. An up-to-date version is available in the Ports Collection as
devel/libiomp5-devel. (r282973) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The stdlib.h and malloc.h headers have been updated to make use of the
gcc alloc_align() attribute. (r282988)

The Blowfish crypt(3) library has been updated to support $2y$ hashes.
(r284483) (Sponsored by ScaleEngine, Inc.)

The execl(3) and execlp(3) library functions have been updated to use
the __sentinel gcc attribute. (r285277)

ABI Compatibility

The LinuxÂ® compatibility version has been updated to 2.6.18. The
compat.linux.osrelease sysctl(8) is evaluated when building the
emulators/linux-c6 and related ports. (r271982)

The stack protector has been upgraded to the "strong" level, elevating
the protection against buffer overflows. While this significantly
improves the security of the system, extensive testing was done to
ensure there are no measurable side effects in performance or
functionality. (r288669)

Kernel

This section covers changes to kernel configurations, system tuning, and
system control parameters that are not otherwise categorized.

Kernel Bug Fixes

A kernel bug that inhibited proper functionality of the dev.cpu.0.freq
sysctl(8) on IntelÂ® processors with Turbo Boostâ¢ enabled has been fixed.
(r265876)

Support for dtrace(1) stack tracing has been fixed for FreeBSD/powerpc,
using the trapexit() and asttrapexit() functions instead of checking
within addressed kernel space. (r271697)

A kernel panic triggered when destroying a vnet(9) jail(8) configured
with gif(4) has been fixed. (r271917)

A kernel panic triggered when destroying a vnet(9) jail(8) configured
with gre(4) has been fixed. (r271918)

A bug in ipfw(4) that could potentially lead to a kernel panic when
using dummynet(4) at layer 2 has been fixed. (r272089)

The kernel RPC has been updated to include several enhancements:
(r280930) (Sponsored by MIT Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory)

-   The 45 MiB limit on requests queued for nfsd(8) threads has been
    removed.

-   Avoids unnecessary throttling by not deferring accounting for
    completed requests.

-   Fixes an integer overflow and signedness bugs.

Support for dtrace(1) has been added for the PowerPC Book-Eâ¢. (r281261)

The kqueue(2) system call has been updated to handle write events to
files larger than 2 gigabytes. (r287886) (Sponsored by Multiplay)

Kernel Configuration

The IMAGACT_BINMISC kernel configuration option has been enabled by
default, which enables application execution through emulators, such as
QEMU via binmiscctl(8). (r266531)

The VT kernel configuration file has been removed, and the vt(4) driver
is included in the GENERIC kernel. To enable vt(4), enter
set kern.vty=vt at the loader(8) prompt during boot, or add kern.vty=vt
to loader.conf(5) and reboot the system. (r268045)

The config(8) utility has been updated to allow using a non-standard
src/ tree, specified as an argument to the -s flag. (r277904)

The FreeBSD/powerpc64 kernel now builds as a position-independent
executable, allowing the kernel to be loaded into and run from any
physical or virtual address. (r277990)

Important:
This change requires an update to loader(8). The userland and kernel
must be updated before rebooting the system.

A new module for creating rpi.dtb has been added for the Raspberry Pi.
(r278338)

[arm] The rpi.dtb module is now installed to /boot/dtb/ by default for
the Raspberry Pi system. (r278340)

Kernel support for Vector-Scalar eXtension (VSX) found on POWER7 and
POWER8 hardware has been added. (r279189) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD
Foundation)

The pmap(9) implementation for 64-bit PowerPCÂ® processors has been
overhaulded to improve concurrency. (r279252) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD
Foundation)

A new module for creating the dtb module for ARM AM335x systems has been
added. (r279824)

The PAE_TABLES kernel configuration option has been added for
FreeBSD/i386, which instructs pmap(9) to use PAE format for page tables
while maintaining a 32-bit physical address size elsewhere in the
kernel. The use of this option can enhance application-level security by
enabling the creation of "no execute" mappings on modern i386
processors. Unlike the PAE option, PAE_TABLES preserves kernel binary
interface (KBI) compatibility with non-PAE kernels, allowing non-PAE
kernel modules and drivers to work with a PAE_TABLES-enabled kernel.
Additionally, system limits are tuned for 4GB maximum RAM, avoiding
kernel virtual address space (KVA) exhaustion. (r281495) (Sponsored by
The FreeBSD Foundation)

The SIFTR kernel configuration has been added, allowing building
siftr(4) statically into the kernel. (r282215)

The ARM boot loader, ubldr, is now relocatable. In addition, ubldr.bin
is now created during build time, which is a stripped binary with an
entry point of 0, providing the ability to specify the load address by
running go ${loadaddr} in u-boot. (r282731)

[amd64,i386] The nvd(4) and nvme(4) drivers are now included in the
GENERIC kernel configuration by default. (r282921) (Sponsored by Intel
Corporation)

A new kernel configuration option, EM_MULTIQUEUE, has been added which
enables multi-queue support in the em(4) driver. (r283959) (Sponsored by
Limelight Networks)

Note:
Multi-queue support in the em(4) driver is not officially supported by
IntelÂ®.

The GENERIC kernel configuration has been updated to include the IPSEC
option by default. (r285142) (Sponsored by Netgate)

Initial NUMA affinity and policy configuration has been added. See
numactl(1), and numa_getaffinity(2), for usage details. (r285387)
(Sponsored by Norse Corporation, Dell, Inc.)

Note:
If the system BIOS generates an invalid ACPI SRAT table, the kernel will
ignore it, effectively disabling NUMA. If dmesg shows "SRAT: Duplicate
local APIC ID", try updating the BIOS to fix NUMA support.

Support for running CloudABI executables on amd64 and arm64 has been
added. CloudABI is a runtime environment that uses capability-based
security exclusively, similar to capsicum(4) always being enabled. It
allows designing, implementing and testing strongly sandboxed
applications more easily. (r285307)

The pms(4) driver has been added to the GENERIC kernel configuration for
supported architectures. (r286231)

The CUBIEBOARD2 kernel configuration has been renamed to A20 to add
support for other boards with the A20 processor, such as the Banana Pi.
(r287306)

Kernel debugging symbols are now installed to
/usr/lib/debug/boot/kernel/. To retain the previous behavior, add
KERN_DEBUGDIR="" to src.conf(5). (r288176) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD
Foundation)

Support for POSIX asynchronous I/O is now included in the kernel by
default. The VFS_AIO kernel option and aio.ko kernel module have been
removed. Asynchronous I/O operations on sockets, local files, and disk
devices are permitted by default. However, operations on other file
types are disabled. See the aio(4) manual page for more details.
(r296277) (Sponsored by Chelsio Communications)

[arm64] arm64 has been switched over to using INTRNG by default.
(r301565) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

System Tuning and Controls

The hwpmc(4) default and maximum callchain depths have been increased.
The default has been increased from 16 to 32, and the maximum increased
from 32 to 128. (r275140) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The kern.osrelease and kern.osreldate are now configurable jail(8)
parameters. (r279361)

The devfs(5) device filesystem has been changed to update timestamps for
read/write operations using seconds precision. A new sysctl(8),
vfs.devfs.dotimes has been added, which when set to a non-zero value,
enables default precision timestamps for these operations. (r280949)
(Sponsored by iXsystems, The FreeBSD Foundation)

A new sysctl(8), kern.racct.enable, has been added, which when set to a
non-zero value allows using rctl(8) with the GENERIC kernel. A new
kernel configuration option, RACCT_DISABLED has also been added.
(r282213) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The GENERIC kernel configuration now includes RACCT and RCTL by default.
(r282901) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

Note:
To enable RACCT and RCTL on a system using the GENERIC kernel
configuration, add kern.racct.enable=1 to loader.conf(5), and reboot the
system.

A new sysctl(8), net.inet.tcp.hostcache.purgenow, has been added, which
when set to 1 during runtime will flush all net.inet.tcp.hostcache
entries. (r283136) (Sponsored by Limelight Networks)

A new sysctl(8), hw.model, has been added, which displays CPU model
information. (r285524)

The uart(4) driver has been updated to allow tuning pulses per second
captured in the CTS line during runtime, whereas previously only the DCD
line could be used without rebuilding the kernel. (r286591)

Devices and Drivers

This section covers changes and additions to devices and device drivers
since 10.3-RELEASE.

Device Drivers

Support for GPS ports has been added to uhso(4). (r260903)

The full(4) device has been added, and the lindev(4) device has been
removed. Prior to this change, lindev(4) provided only the /dev/full
character device, returning ENOSPC on write attempts. As this device is
not specific to LinuxÂ®, a native FreeBSD version has been added.
(r265132)

Hardware context support has been added to the drm/i915 driver, adding
support for Mesa 9.2 and later. (r271705)

The vt(4) driver has been updated, replacing the bitmapped
kern.vt.spclkeys sysctl(8) with individual kern.vt.kbd_* variants.
(r273178)

The hpet(4) driver has been updated to create a /dev/hpetN device,
providing access to HPET from userspace. (r273598)

The drm code has been updated to match LinuxÂ® version 3.8.13. (r280183)

The psm(4) driver has been updated to include improved support for newer
SynapticsÂ® touchpads and the ClickPadÂ® mouse on newer Lenovoâ¢ laptops.
(r281440)

Support for the Freescale PCI Root Complex device has been added to
FreeBSD/powerpc. (r282783)

The cyapa(4) driver has been added, supporting the Cypress APA I2C
trackpad. (r285876)

The isl(4) driver has been added, supporting the Intersil I2C ISL29018
digital ambient light sensor. (r285883)

Storage Drivers

The mpr(4) device has been added, providing support for LSI Fusion-MPT 3
12Gb SCSI/SATA controllers. (r265236) (Sponsored by LSI, Spectra Logic)

The mrsas(4) driver has been added, providing support for LSI MegaRAID
SAS controllers. The mfi(4) driver will attach to the controller, by
default. To enable mrsas(4) add hw.mfi.mrsas_enable=1 to
/boot/loader.conf, which turns off mfi(4) device probing. (r265555)
(Sponsored by LSI)

Note:
At this time, the mfiutil(8) utility and the FreeBSD version of MegaCLI
and StorCli do not work with mrsas(4).

The ctl(4) subsystem has been updated, increasing the ports limit from
128 to 256, and LUN limit from 256 to 1024. (r275461) (Sponsored by
iXsystems)

The asr(4) driver has been removed, and is no longer supported.
(r276526)

The hptnr(4) driver has been updated to version 1.1.1. (r281387)

The pms(4) driver has been added, providing support for the PMC Sierra
line of SAS/SATA host bus adapters. (r285662)

The ioat(4) driver has been added, providing support for the PSE
(Platform Storage Extension). (r287117) (Sponsored by EMC / Isilon
Storage Division)

The CTL High Availability implementation has been rewritten. (r287621)
(Sponsored by iXsystems)

The ctl(4) driver has been updated to support CD-ROM and removable
devices. (r288310)

The isp(4) driver has been updated and improved: added support for
16Gbps FC cards, improved target mode support, completed Multi-ID (NPIV)
functionality. (Sponsored by iXsystems)

Network Drivers

Support for Broadcom chipsets BCM57764, BCM57767, BCM57782, BCM57786 and
BCM57787 has been added to bge(4). (r258830)

The deprecated nve(4) driver has been removed. Users of NVIDIA nForce
MCP network adapters are advised to use the nfe(4) driver instead, which
has been the default driver for this hardware since FreeBSD 7.0.
(r261975)

The if_nf10bmac(4) device has been added, providing support for
NetFPGA-10G Embedded CPU Ethernet Core. (r264601) (Sponsored by DARPA,
AFRL)

Note:
The if_nf10bmac(4) driver operates on the FPGA, and is not suited for
the PCI host interface.

The ath_hal(4) driver has been updated to support the Atheros AR1111
chipset. (r265348) (Sponsored by Netgate)

The iwn(4) driver was added, providing support for the IntelÂ® Centrinoâ¢
Wireless-N 105 and 135 chipsets. (r266770)

Support for the cxgbe(4) Terminator 5 (T5) 10G/40G cards has been added
to netmap(4). (r266757) (Sponsored by Chelsio Communications)

The alc(4) driver has been updated to support AR816x and AR817x ethernet
controllers. (r272730)

The pf(4) packet filter default hash has been changed from Jenkins to
Murmur3, providing a 3-percent performance increase in
packets-per-second. (r272906)

The vxlan(4) driver has been added, which creates a virtual Layer 2
(Ethernet) network overlaid in a Layer 3 (IP/UDP) network. The vxlan(4)
driver is analogous to vlan(4), but is designed to be better suited for
large, multiple-tenant datacenter environments. (r273331)

The gre(4) driver has been significantly overhauled, and has been split
into two separate modules, gre(4) and me(4). (r274246) (Sponsored by
Yandex LLC)

The ral(4) driver has been updated to support the RT5390 and RT5392
chipsets. (r278551)

The sfxge(4) driver has been updated to support Solarflare Flareon Ultra
7000-series chipsets. (r283514) (Sponsored by Solarflare Communications,
Inc.)

The em(4) driver has been updated with improved transmission queue hang
detection. (r283923) (Sponsored by Limelight Networks)

The cdce(4) driver has been updated to include support for the RTL8153
chipset. (r284125)

The iwm(4) driver has been imported from OpenBSD, providing support for
IntelÂ® 3160/7260/7265 wireless chipsets. (r286441)

The em(4) driver has been updated to allow disabling CRC stripping.
(r286829) (Sponsored by Limelight Networks)

The pf(4) implementation has been updated to remove support for the
scrub fragment crop|drop-ovl filtering rule. Systems with this rule in
pf.conf(5) will implicitly be converted to the scrub fragment reassemble
filtering rule, without necessary intervention. (r287222)

The lagg(4) driver has been updated to remove support for the fec
protocol. (r288654)

The dummynet(4) driver has been updated to include support for AQM
(Active Queue Management), adding support for PIE (Proportional Integral
controller Enhanced) and FQ-PIE (Fair Queueing Proportional Integral
controller Enhanced). (r300779)

Hardware Support

This section covers general hardware support for physical machines,
hypervisors, and virtualization environments, as well as hardware
changes and updates that do not otherwise fit in other sections of this
document.

Hardware Support

The asmc(4) driver has been updated to support the AppleÂ® MacMini 3,1.
(r268303)

Support for FreeBSD/ia64 (Itanium) has been dropped as of FreeBSD 11.
(r268351)

An issue that could cause a system to hang when entering ACPI S3 state
(suspend to RAM) has been corrected in the acpi(4) and pci(4) drivers.
(r274386)

The power management unit subsystem has been updated to support power
button events on certain PowerPC hardware, such as aluminum PowerBook .
(r274733)

The hwpmc(4) driver has been updated to correct performance counter
sampling on PowerPC G4 (MPC74xxx) and G5 class processors. (r275190)

The OpenCrypto framework has been updated to include AES-ICM and AES-GCM
modes, both of which have also been added to the aesni(4) driver.
(r275732) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation,Netgate)

[powerpc] The hwpmc(4) driver has been updated to support the Freescale
e500 core. (r281713)

The ig4(4) driver has been added, providing support for the fourth
generation IntelÂ® I2C SMBus. (r283766)

The uart(4) driver has been updated to support AMT devices on newer
systems.

[arm64] Initial SMP support has been added to the FreeBSD/arm64 port.
(r285316) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The enc(4) driver has updated to allow creating an interface via
kldload(8) during runtime without requiring additional kernel and/or
userland changes. (r291292) (Sponsored by Yandex LLC)

The dtsec(4) driver for Freescale QorIQ SoCs has been added, supporting
P2041, P3041, P5010, and P5020 systems. (r296177)

Freescale PowerQUICC and QorIQ systems now support larger address
spaces, equivalent to PAE mode on i386. (r297001)

The e500mc and e5500 PowerPC cores are now supported, supporting most
QorIQ systems. (r297977)

SMP for Multicore Freescale QorIQ systems now works correctly for SoCs
with the AP cores in boot holdoff mode (not in spinloop wait mode).
(r298237)

Native PCI-express HotPlug support is enabled by default on amd64,
arm64, and powerpc. This feature has exposed compatibility issues on
some hardware that result in missing devices or a hang during boot. To
work around such issues, run set hw.pci.enable_pcie_hp=0 in the boot
loader, and add hw.pci.enable_pcie_hp=0 to /boot/loader.conf. (r299142)

Virtualization Support

Support for the "Virtual Interrupt Delivery" feature of IntelÂ® VT-x is
enabled if supported by the CPU. This feature can be disabled by running
sysctl hw.vmm.vmx.use_apic_vid=0. Additionally, to persist this setting
across reboots, add hw.vmm.vmx.use_apic_vid=0 to /etc/sysctl.conf.
(r260410)

Support for "Posted Interrupt Processing" is enabled if supported by the
CPU. This feature can be disabled by running
sysctl hw.vmm.vmx.use_apic_pir=0. Additionally, to persist this setting
across reboots, add hw.vmm.vmx.use_apic_pir=0 to /etc/sysctl.conf.
(r260532)

Unmapped IO support has been added to virtio_blk(4). (r260582)

Unmapped IO support has been added to virtio_scsi(4). (r260583)

The virtio_random(4) driver has been added to harvest entropy from the
host system. (r260847)

FreeBSD/i386 guests can be run under bhyve. (r261504)

Support for running a FreeBSD/amd64 Xen guest instance as PVH guest has
been added. PVH mode, short for "Para-Virtualized Hardware", uses
para-virtualized drivers for boot and I/O, and uses hardware
virtualization extensions for all other tasks, without the need for
emulation. (r267536) (Sponsored by Citrix Systems R&D)

The bhyve(8) hypervisor has been updated to support AMDÂ® processors with
SVM and AMD-V hardware extensions. (r273375)

The virtio_console(4) driver has been added, which provides an interface
to VirtIO console devices through a tty(4) device. (r273515)

Support for PCI Single Root I/O Virtualization (SR-IOV) has been
introduced, allowing the creation of PCI Virtual Functions (VFs) for
device drivers that support SR-IOV. See iovctl(8) for details on
creating and configuring VFs. (r279463) (Sponsored by Sandvine, Inc.)

The bhyve(8) hypervisor has been updated to support DSM TRIM commands
for virtual AHCI disks. (r279957)

[arm] Support for the QEMU virt system has been added. (r281439)

The Hyper-Vâ¢ drivers have been updated with several enhancements:
(r282212) (Sponsored by Microsoft Open Source Technology Center)

-   The hv_vmbus(4) driver now has multi-channel support.

-   The hv_storvsc(4) driver now has scatter/gather support, in addition
    to performance improvements.

-   The hv_kvp(4) driver has received several bug fixes.

Support for xen(4) para-virtualized domU kernels has been removed.
(r282274)

The hv_netvsc(4) driver has been updated to support checksum offloading
and TSO. (r284746) (Sponsored by Microsoft Open Source Technology
Center)

The xen(4) blkfront driver has been updated to include support for blkif
indirect segment I/O. (r286062)

Indirect segment I/O is enabled by default in the Xen blkfront driver
when running on AWS EC2. (r302288)

Native graphics support has been added to the bhyve(8) hypervisor.
(r302332)

ARM Support

The nand(4) device is enabled for ARM devices by default. (r260921)

Support for the Exynos 5420 Octa system has been added. (r266943)

The SMP option has been enabled for all Exynos 5 systems supported by
FreeBSD. (r267390)

Support for the Toradex Apalis i.MX6 development board has been added.
(r268838)

An issue that could cause instability when detecting SD cards on the
Raspberry Pi SOC has been fixed. (r273264)

The bcm2835_cpufreq driver has been added, which supports CPU frequency
and voltage control on the Raspberry Pi SOC. (r275963)

Support to turn off the BeagleBone Black system with the shutdown(8) -p
flag or by invoking poweroff(8) has been added. (r277042)

Audio transmission drivers have been added for Digital Audio Multiplexer
(AUDMUXM), Smart Direct Memory Access Controller (SDMA), and Syncronous
Serial Interface (SSI). (r277644)

Initial support for the ARM AArch64 architecture has been added.
(r280259) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

Kernel support for Thumb-2 userland has been added. (r282779)

Support for the hardware power button on the BeagleBone Black system has
been added. (r282827)

Initial ACPI support has been added for FreeBSD/arm64. (r284273)
(Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

Support for 1-Wire devices has been added, providing support for 1-Wire
hardware through gpio(4). See ow(4), owc(4), and ow_temp(4) for more
information. (r287225)

Support for the HiSilicon HI6220 SoC has been added. (r287371)
(Sponsored by ABT Systems, Ltd.)

The second CPU core on Allwinner A20 SoC have been enabled. (r263698)

Support for the Allwinner H3 SoC has been added. (r299688)

Support for X-Powers AXP813 and AXP818 power management integrated
circuits have been added. (r299786)

Support for the Allwinner Reduced Serial Bus (RSB) has been added.
(r299781)

Support for Allwinner A20 HDMI has been added. (r296064)

Support for GPIO, Sensors and interrupts on AXP209 power management
integrated circuits have been added. (r300777)

Storage

This section covers changes and additions to file systems and other
storage subsystems, both local and networked.

General Storage

The ctl(4) LUN mapping has been rewritten, replacing iSCSI-specific
mapping mechanisms with a new mechanism that works for any port.
(r278037) (Sponsored by iXsystems)

The ctld(8) utility has been updated to allow controlling non-iSCSI
ctl(4) ports. (r278354) (Sponsored by iXsystems)

The autofs(5) subsystem has been updated to include a new auto_master(5)
map, -media, which allows automatically mounting removable media, such
as CD drives or USB flash drives. (r275681) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD
Foundation)

The autofs(5) subsystem has been updated to include a new auto_master(5)
map, -noauto, which handles fstab(5) entries set to noauto. (r279955)
(Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The GELI class has been updated to support the BIO_DELETE g_bio(9)
bio_cmd field, providing TRIM/UNMAP support on GELI-backed SSD storage
providers. (r286444)

The camdd(8) utility has been added, which allows copying data
sequentially to and from SCSI devices, files, block devices and tape
drives. If the source and/or destination is a SCSI disk, camdd(8) can
use the asynchronous pass(4) interface to queue multiple I/Os for
improved speed. (ATA passthrough support for camdd(8) is in
development.) (r291716) (Sponsored by Spectra Logic)

The pass(4) SCSI/ATA passthrough driver now has an asynchronous
interface. User applications may queue many requests, get notification
of completion via kqueue(2) and retrieve status later. camdd(8) is an
example application using the interface. (r291716) (Sponsored by Spectra
Logic)

Support for parsing libucl-based configuration files has been added to
ctld(8). (r295212) (Sponsored by iXsystems)

The ahci(4) driver has been updated to add NCQ TRIM support for drives
that support it. (r298002) (Sponsored by Netflix)

Note:
Drives that advertise this feature but do not properly support it have
been blacklisted. Systems experiencing traffic problems with NCQ TRIM
enabled can set the kern.cam.ada.%d.quirks tunable to 2 for 512k sectors
or 3 for 4096k sectors, replacing %d with the drive number.

The cam(4) driver has been updated to allow I/O scheduling tuning to fit
workload and drive characteristics. This option is off by default, and
can be enabled by adding option CAM_IOSCHED_ADAPTIVE option to the
kernel configuration and recompiling the kernel. (r298002) (Sponsored by
Netflix)

The camcontrol(8) command can manually force updating capacity data
after a disk gets resized using the reprobe subcommand. (r299371)
(Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

Leading spaces are now stripped off SCSI disk serial numbers when
populating the CAM serial number. This affects the output of diskinfo(8)
and the names of /dev/diskid/DISK-* device nodes, among other things.
(r300880) (Sponsored by Spectra Logic)

Support for managing Shingled Magnetic Recording (SMR) drives has been
added. (r300207) (Sponsored by Spectra Logic)

Networked Storage

The new filesystem automount facility, autofs(5), has been added. The
new autofs(5) facility is similar to that found in other UNIXÂ®-like
operating systems, such as OS Xâ¢ and Solarisâ¢. The autofs(5) facility
uses a Sunâ¢-compatible auto_master(5) configuration file, and is
administered with the automount(8) userland utility, and the
automountd(8) and autounmountd(8) daemons. (r270096) (Sponsored by The
FreeBSD Foundation)

Support for the timeo, actimeo, noac, and proto options have been added
to mount_nfs(8). (r273849) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The Mellanox implementation of iSER (iSCSI Extensions for RDMA) has been
imported. (r300723)

The ability to discover iSCSI targets without having to attach to a
target has been added to the iscsictl(8) command. (r301033) (Sponsored
by The FreeBSD Foundation)

ZFS

The arc_meta_limit statistics are now visible through the kstat
sysctl(8). As a result of this change, the vfs.zfs.arc_meta_used
sysctl(8) has been removed, and replaced with the
kstat.zfs.misc.arcstats.arc_meta_used sysctl(8). (r275748)

The zfs(8) l2arc code has been updated to take ashift into account when
gathering buffers to be written to the l2arc device. (r287099)
(Sponsored by ClusterHQ)

Four new resources have been added to rctl(8) to allow throttles to be
set on filesystem IO. (r297633) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The zfsd daemon has been added, which manages hotspares and replements
in drive slots that publish physical paths. (r300906) (Sponsored by
iXsystems, Spectra Logic)

The minimum and maximum values for the ZFS adaptive replacement cache
can be modified at runtime. (r302265) (Sponsored by Multiplay)

geom(4)

Support for the disklabel64 partitioning scheme has been added to
gpart(8). (r267359)

Support for the apple-boot, apple-hfs, and apple-ufs MBR partitioning
schemes have been added to gpart(8). (r282465)

The gpart(8) utility has been updated to include a new attribute for GPT
partitions, lenovofix, which when set, which works around BIOS
compatibility issues reported on several Lenovoâ¢ laptops. (r285594)
(Sponsored by ScaleEngine, Inc.)

Boot Loader Changes

This section covers the boot loader, boot menu, and other boot-related
changes.

Boot Loader Changes

The memory test run at boot time on FreeBSD/amd64 platforms has been
disabled by default. (r258431) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

A new ttys(5) class, 3wire, has been added. This is similar to the
existing terminal classes, but does not have a defined baudrate.
(r262955)

The vt(4) driver has been made the default system console driver. The
syscons(4) driver is still available, and can be enabled by adding
kern.vty=sc in loader.conf(5). Alternatively, syscons(4) can be enabled
at boot time by entering set kern.vty=sc at the loader(8) prompt.
(r274085)

Support for bzipfs has been added to the EFI loader. (r279950)

The boot loader has been updated to support entering the GELI passphrase
before loading the kernel. To enable this behavior, add
geom_eli_passphrase_prompt="YES" to loader.conf(5). (r281616)

[arm] The ttys(5) file for FreeBSD/arm has been updated to enable ttyu1,
ttyu2, and ttyu3 by default, if the callin port is an active console
port. (r284683) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The default installation directory for modules has been changed to
/boot/modules. (r299393)

Networking

This section describes changes that affect networking in FreeBSD.

Network Protocols

Support for the IPX network transport protocol has been removed, and
will not be supported in FreeBSD 11 and later releases. (r263140)

Support for PLPMTUD blackhole detection (RFC 4821) has been added to the
tcp(4) stack, disabled by default. New control tunables have been added:
(r272720) (Sponsored by Limelight Networks)

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Tunable                           | Description                       |
+===================================+===================================+
| net.i                             | Enables or disables PLPMTUD       |
| net.tcp.pmtud_blackhole_detection | blackhole detection               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| net.inet.tcp.pmtud_blackhole_mss  | MSS to try for IPv4               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| n                                 | MSS to try for IPv6               |
| et.inet.tcp.v6pmtud_blackhole_mss |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

New monitoring sysctl(8)s haven been added:

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Tunable                           | Description                       |
+===================================+===================================+
| net.i                             | Number of times the code was      |
| net.tcp.pmtud_blackhole_activated | activated to attempt downshifting |
|                                   | the MSS                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| net.inet.                         | Number of times the blackhole MSS |
| tcp.pmtud_blackhole_min_activated | was used in an attempt to         |
|                                   | downshift                         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ne                                | Number of times that the          |
| t.inet.tcp.pmtud_blackhole_failed | blackhole failed to connect after |
|                                   | downshifting the MSS              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Support for IP identification for atomic datagrams (RFC 6864) has been
added. Support for this feature can be toggled with the
net.inet.ip.rfc6864 sysctl(8), which is enabled by default. (r280971)
(Sponsored by Netflix, Nginx, Inc.)

The IPSEC has been updated to include support for AES modes on both
software-only and hardware-backed (aesni(4)) systems. (r285336)
(Sponsored by Netgate)

The network stack has been updated to fix handling of IPv6 On-Link
redirects. (r287798) (Sponsored by Dell, Inc.)

Support to be able to reroot into a NFSv4 volume has been added.
(r299848) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The net.inet.tcp.ecn.enable sysctl mib has been changed from a binary
off/on control to a three way setting. (r300240)

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Value                             | Description                       |
+===================================+===================================+
| 0                                 | Totally disable ECN.              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 1                                 | Enable ECN if incoming            |
|                                   | connections request it. Outgoing  |
|                                   | connections will request ECN.     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 2                                 | Enable ECN if incoming            |
|                                   | connections request it. Outgoing  |
|                                   | conections will not request ECN.  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Dummynet AQM, an independent implementation of CoDel and FQ-CoDel for
ipfw/dummynet has been imported to the base system. (r300779)

The unused SIOCSIFALIFETIME_IN6 ioctl has been removed. (r301875)

Release Engineering and Integration

This section convers changes that are specific to the FreeBSD Release
Engineering processes.

Integration Changes

The Release Engineering build tools have been updated to include support
for producing virtual machine disk images for various cloud hosting
providers. (r277458) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The Release Engineering build tools have been updated to use
multi-threaded xz(1). By default, the number of xz(1) threads is set to
the number of cores available. (r278926)

The Release Engineering build tools have been updated to include support
for building FreeBSD/arm64 virtual machine and memory stick installation
images. (r281802) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The Release Engineering build tools have been updated to support
building FreeBSD/arm images without external utilities for supported
boards where a corresponding u-boot port exists in the Ports Collection.
(r282693) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The FreeBSD/i386 memory stick installation images are now created using
the mkimg(1) utility, matching the way the FreeBSD/amd64 images are
created. (r283307) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: June 19, 2021 by Danilo G. Baio

Legal Notices | Â© 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
