[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 5.1-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v 1.54
2003/12/04 23:53:54 bmah Exp $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of Wind River Systems, Inc. This is
expected to change soon.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the ``™''
or the ``®'' symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 5.1-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release or too late in
  the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
  documentation. This information includes security advisories, as well
  as news relating to the software or documentation that could affect
  its operation or usability. An up-to-date version of this document
  should always be consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 5.1-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 5.2-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains ``late-breaking news'' about FreeBSD
5.1-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the ``current errata'' for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

The implementation of the realpath(3) function contained a single-byte
buffer overflow bug. This had various impacts, depending on the
application using realpath(3) and other factors. This bug was fixed on
the 5-CURRENT development branch before 5.1-RELEASE; FreeBSD 5.1-RELEASE
is therefore not affected. However, this change was not noted in the
release documentation. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-03:08.

The kernel contains a bug that could allow it to attempt delivery of
invalid signals, leading to a kernel panic or, under some circumstances,
unauthorized modification of kernel memory. This bug has been fixed on
the 5-CURRENT development branch and the 5.1-RELEASE security fix
branch. For more information, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:09.

A bug in the iBCS2 emulation module could result in disclosing the
contents of kernel memory. (Note that this module is not enabled in
FreeBSD by default.) This bug has been fixed on the 5-CURRENT
development branch and the 5.1-RELEASE security fix branch. More
information can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:10.

OpenSSH contains a bug in its buffer management code that could
potentially cause it to crash. This bug has been fixed via a
vendor-supplied patch on the 5-CURRENT development branch and the
5.1-RELEASE security fix branch. For more details, refer to security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:12.

sendmail contains a remotely-exploitable buffer overflow. This bug has
been fixed via a new version import on the 5-CURRENT development branch
and via a vendor-supplied patch on the 5.1-RELEASE security fix branch.
More details can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:13.

The FreeBSD ARP code contains a bug that could allow the kernel to cause
resource starvation which eventually results in a system panic. This bug
has been fixed on the 5-CURRENT development branch and the 5.1-RELEASE
security fix branch. More information can be found in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-03:14.

Several bugs in the OpenSSH PAM authentication code could have impacts
ranging from incorrect authentication to a stack corruption. These have
been corrected via vendor-supplied patches; details can be found in
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:15.

The implementation of the procfs(5) and the linprocfs(5) contain a bug
that could result in disclosing the contents of kernel memory. This bug
has been fixed on the 5-CURRENT development branch and the 5.1-RELEASE
security fix branch. More information can be found in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-03:17.

OpenSSL contains several bugs which could allow a remote attacker to
crash an OpenSSL-using application or to execute arbitrary code with the
privileges of the application. These bugs have been fixed via a
vendor-supplied patch on the 5-CURRENT development branch and the
5.1-RELEASE security fix branch. Note that only applications that use
OpenSSL's ASN.1 or X.509 handling code are affected (OpenSSH is
unaffected, for example). More information can be found in security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:18.

BIND contains the potential for a denial-of-service attack. This
vulnerability has been addressed by a vendor patch on the 5.1-RELEASE
security fix branch and by the import of a new version to the 5-CURRENT
development branch. For more information, see FreeBSD-SA-03:19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Open Issues

The RAIDframe disk driver described in raid(4) is non-functional for
this release.

ACPI seems to make some i386™ machines unstable. Turning off ACPI
support may help solve some of these problems; see an item in Section 4.

An integer overflow could cause kernel panics on PAE-using machines with
certain memory sizes. This bug has been corrected on both the RELENG_5_1
and HEAD branches. A workaround for this problem is to remove some
memory, update the system in question, and reinstall the memory.

Attempting to write to an msdosfs(5) file system that has been upgraded
from read-only to read-write via mount -u will cause the system to lock
up. To work around this problem, unmount the file system first, then
mount it again with the appropriate options instead of using mount -u.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Late-Breaking News

ipfw(4) should work correctly on strict-alignment 64-bit architectures
such as alpha and Sparc64®.

The release notes should have stated that the libthr library is built by
default for the i386 platform.

FreeBSD 5.1-RELEASE includes some new boot loader scripts designed to
make booting FreeBSD with different options easier. This may help
diagnose bootstrapping problems. These scripts build on the existing
Forth-based boot loader scripts (thus, /boot/loader.conf and other
existing loader configuration files still apply). They are only
installed by default for new binary installs on i386 machines. The new
scripts present a boot-time menu that controls how FreeBSD is booted,
and include options to turn off ACPI, a ``safe mode'' boot, single-user
booting, and verbose booting. ``Safe mode'' booting can be particularly
useful when compatibility with a system's hardware is uncertain, and
sets the following kernel tunable variables:

    hint.acpi.0.disabled=1 # disable ACPI (i386 only)
    hw.ata.ata_dma=0       # disable IDE DMA
    hw.ata.atapi_dma=0     # disable ATAPI/IDE DMA
    hw.ata.wc=0            # disable IDE disk write cache
    hw.eisa_slots=0        # disable probing for EISA devices

For new installs on i386 architecture machines, sysinstall(8) will try
to determine if ACPI was disabled via the new boot loader scripts
mentioned above, and if so, ask if this change should be made permanent.

The release notes should have mentioned that work on the following
features was sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA): OpenPAM, NSS support, PAE support, various MAC framework
updates, the GEOM disk geometry system.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT should subscribe to the
<current@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
