[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v 1.38
2003/04/29 20:39:38 hrs Exp $

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release or too late in
  the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
  documentation. This information includes security advisories, as well
  as news relating to the software or documentation that could affect
  its operation or usability. An up-to-date version of this document
  should always be consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 5.1-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains ``late-breaking news'' about FreeBSD
5.0-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the ``current errata'' for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

Remotely exploitable vulnerabilities in CVS could allow an attacker to
execute arbitrary comands on a CVS server. More details can be found in
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:01.

A timing-based attack on OpenSSL, could allow a very powerful attacker
access to plaintext under certain circumstances. This problem has been
corrected in FreeBSD 5.0-CURRENT with an upgrade to OpenSSL 0.9.7. On
supported security fix branches, this problem has been corrected with
the import of OpenSSL 0.9.6i. See security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:02 for
more details.

It may be possible to recover the shared secret key used by the
implementation of the ``syncookies'' feature. This reduces its
effectiveness in dealing with TCP SYN flood denial-of-service attacks.
Workaround information and fixes are given in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-03:03.

Due to buffer overflows in header parsing in sendmail, a remote attacker
can create a specially-crafted message that may cause sendmail(8) to
execute arbitrary code with the privileges of the user running it,
typically root. More information, including pointers to patches, can be
found in security advisories FreeBSD-SA-03:04 and FreeBSD-SA-03:07.

The XDR encoder/decoder does incorrect bounds-checking, which could
allow a remote attacker to cause a denial-of-service. For bugfix
information, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:05.

OpenSSL has been found vulnerable to two recently-disclosed attacks.
Information on workarounds and patches for supported security branches
is contained in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-03:06.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Late-Breaking News

GEOM

The geom(4)-based disk partitioning code in the kernel will not allow an
open partition to be overwritten. This usually prevents the use of
disklabel -B to update the boot blocks on a disk because the a partition
overlaps the space where the boot blocks are stored. A suggested
workaround is to boot from an alternate disk, a CDROM, or a fixit
floppy.

 dump(8)

When using disk media with sector sizes larger than 512 bytes (for
instance, gbde(4) encrypted disks), the dump(8) program fails to respect
the larger sector size and cannot dump the partition. One possible
workaround is to copy the entire file system in raw format and dump the
copy. It is, for instance, possible to dump a file system stored in a
regular file:

    # dd if=/dev/ad0s1d.bde of=/junk/ad0.dd bs=1m
    # dump 0f - /junk/ad0.dd | ...

A simpler workaround is to use tar(1) or cpio(1) to make backup copies.

 mly(4)

Hangs were reported during FreeBSD 5.0 snapshot installations when
installing to mly(4)-supported RAID arrays, in hardware configurations
that appear to work fine under FreeBSD 4.7-RELEASE. These problems have
been corrected in FreeBSD 5.0-CURRENT.

NETNCP/Netware File System Support

NETNCP and nwfs appear to be as-yet unadapted for KSE, and hence not
working. These have been fixed in FreeBSD 5.0-CURRENT.

 iir(4) controller

During installation, the iir(4) controller appears to probe correctly,
but finds no disk devices.

 truss(1) race condition

truss(1) appears to contain a race condition during the start-up of
debugging, which can result in truss(1) failing to attach to the process
before it exists. The symptom is that truss(1) reports that it cannot
open the procfs(5) node supporting the process being debugged. A bug
also appears to exist wherein truss(1) will hang if execve(2) returns
ENOENT A further race appears to exist in which truss(1) will return
``PIOCWAIT: Input/output error'' occasionally on startup. The fix for
this sufficiently changes process execution handling that it has been
deferred until after 5.0.

Disk Partitioning in Installer

Some bugs have been reported in sysinstall(8) disk partitioning. One
observed problem on the i386 is that sysinstall(8) cannot recalculate
the free space left on a disk after changing the type of an FDISK-type
partition.

Stale Documentation

In some case, documentation (such as the FAQ or Handbook) has not been
updated to take into account FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE features. Examples of
areas where documentation is still needed include gbde(8) and the new
``fast IPsec'' implementation.

SMB File System

Attempting to unmount smbfs shares may fail with ``Device busy'' errors
even when the mount-point is not really busy. A workaround is to keep
trying to unmount the share until it eventually succeeds. This bug has
been fixed in 5.0-CURRENT.

Forcefully unmounting (umount -f) smbfs shares may cause a kernel panic.
This bug has been fixed in 5.0-CURRENT.

 fstat(2)

When called on a connected socket file descriptor, fstat(2) is supposed
to return the number of bytes available to read in the st_size member of
struct stat. However, st_size is always erroneously reported as 0 on TCP
sockets. This bug has been fixed in 5.0-CURRENT.

Kernel Event Queues

The kqueue(2) EVFILT_READ filter erroneously indicates that 0 bytes are
available to be read on TCP sockets, regardless of the number of bytes
that are actually available. The NOTE_LOWAT flag for EVFILT_READ is also
broken on TCP sockets. This bug has been fixed in 5.0-CURRENT.

POSIX Named Semaphores

FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE introduced support for POSIX named semaphores but
the implementation contains a critical bug that causes sem_open(3) to
incorrectly handle the opening of the same semaphore multiple times by
the same process, and that causes sem_close(3) to crash calling
programs. This bug has been fixed in 5.0-CURRENT.

/dev/tty Permissions

FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE has a minor bug in how the permissions of /dev/tty
are handled. This can be triggered by logging in as a non-root, non-tty
group user, and using su(1) to switch to a second non-root, non-tty
group user. ssh(1) will fail because it cannot open /dev/tty. This bug
has been fixed in 5.0-CURRENT.

 growfs(8)

growfs(8) no longer works on vinum(4) volumes (and presumably, on
geom(4) entities) since these subsystems no longer fake disklabels, but
growfs(8) insists on examining a label.

IPFW

ipfw(4) skipto rules do not work when coupled with the log keyword.
ipfw(4) uid rules also do not work properly. These bugs have been fixed
in 5.0-CURRENT.

Passwords and adduser(8)

adduser(8) does not correctly handle setting user passwords containing
special shell characters. This problem has been corrected in
5.0-CURRENT.

 xl(4)

The xl(4) driver has a timing bug that may cause a kernel panic (or
other problems) when attempting to configure an interface. This bug has
been fixed in 5.0-CURRENT.

ISC DHCP

ISC DHCP was updated to 3.0.1rc11. This update was actually a part of
FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE, but was not documented in the release notes.

 amd(8) Interoperability

5.0-RELEASE contains some bugs in its non-blocking RPC code. The most
noticeable side-effect of these bugs was that amd(8) users were not able
to mount volumes from a 5.0-RELEASE server. This bug has been fixed in
5.0-CURRENT.

nsswitch

The release note documenting the addition of nsswitch support gave an
incorrect name for the old resolver configuration file. It should have
been listed as /etc/host.conf.

Mailman

Recently the mailing lists were changed from majordomo to the currently
used Mailman list server. More information about using the new mailing
lists can be found by visiting the FreeBSD Mailman Info Page.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT should subscribe to the
<current@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
