[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/pc98 6.4-RELEASE Hardware Notes

The FreeBSD Documentation Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 The FreeBSD
Documentation Project

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 Supported Systems

3 Supported Devices

3.1 Disk Controllers

3.2 Ethernet Interfaces

3.3 Token Ring Interfaces

3.4 FDDI Interfaces

3.5 ATM Interfaces

3.6 Wireless Network Interfaces

3.7 Miscellaneous Networks

3.8 ISDN Interfaces

3.9 Serial Interfaces

3.10 Sound Devices

3.11 Camera and Video Capture Devices

3.12 USB Devices

3.13 IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Devices

3.14 Bluetooth Devices

3.15 Cryptographic Accelerators

3.16 Miscellaneous

1 Introduction

This document contains the hardware compatibility notes for FreeBSD
6.4-RELEASE on the NEC PC-98x1 hardware platform (also referred to as
FreeBSD/pc98 6.4-RELEASE). It lists devices known to work on this
platform, as well as some notes on boot-time kernel customization that
may be useful when attempting to configure support for new devices.

  Note: This document includes information specific to the NEC PC-98x1
  hardware platform. Versions of the hardware compatibility notes for
  other architectures will differ in some details.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Supported Systems

NEC PC-9801/9821 series with almost all i386-compatible processors,
including 80486, Pentium, Pentium Pro, Pentium II, and variants. All
i386-compatible processors by AMD, Cyrix, IBM, and IDT are also
supported.

NEC FC-9801/9821 series, and NEC SV-98 series (both of them are
compatible with PC-9801/9821 series) should be supported.

EPSON PC-386/486/586 series, which are compatible with NEC PC-9801
series are supported.

High-resolution mode is not supported. NEC PC-98XA/XL/RL/XL^2, and NEC
PC-H98 series are supported in normal (PC-9801 compatible) mode only.

Although there are some multi-processor systems (such as Rs20/B20),
SMP-related features of FreeBSD are not supported yet.

PC-9801/9821 standard bus (called C-Bus), PC-9801NOTE expansion bus
(110pin), and PCI bus are supported. New Extend Standard Architecture
(NESA) bus (used in PC-H98, SV-H98, and FC-H98 series) is not supported.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Supported Devices

$FreeBSD:
releng/6.4/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/hardware/common/dev.sgml 174714
2007-12-17 12:22:05Z bmah $

This section describes the devices currently known to be supported by
with FreeBSD on the NEC PC-98x1 platform. Other configurations may also
work, but simply have not been tested yet. Feedback, updates, and
corrections to this list are encouraged.

Where possible, the drivers applicable to each device or class of
devices is listed. If the driver in question has a manual page in the
FreeBSD base distribution (most should), it is referenced here.
Information on specific models of supported devices, controllers, etc.
can be found in the manual pages.

  Note: The device lists in this document are being generated
  automatically from FreeBSD manual pages. This means that some devices,
  which are supported by multiple drivers, may appear multiple times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1 Disk Controllers

IDE/ATA controllers ( ata(4) driver)

IDE/ATA controllers (wdc driver)

-   On-board IDE controller

The adv(4) driver supports the following SCSI controllers:

-   AdvanSys ABP510/5150

-   AdvanSys ABP5140

-   AdvanSys ABP5142

-   AdvanSys ABP902/3902

-   AdvanSys ABP3905

-   AdvanSys ABP915

-   AdvanSys ABP920

-   AdvanSys ABP3922

-   AdvanSys ABP3925

-   AdvanSys ABP930, ABP930U, ABP930UA

-   AdvanSys ABP960, ABP960U

-   AdvanSys ABP542

-   AdvanSys ABP742

-   AdvanSys ABP842

-   AdvanSys ABP940

-   AdvanSys ABP940UA/3940UA

-   AdvanSys ABP940U

-   AdvanSys ABP3960UA

-   AdvanSys ABP970, ABP970U

-   AdvanSys ABP752

-   AdvanSys ABP852

-   AdvanSys ABP950

-   AdvanSys ABP980, ABP980U

-   AdvanSys ABP980UA/3980UA

-   MELCO IFC-USP (PC-98)

-   RATOC REX-PCI30 (PC-98)

-   @Nifty FNECHARD IFC-USUP-TX (PC-98)

The adw(4) driver supports SCSI controllers including:

-   AdvanSys ABP940UW/ABP3940UW

-   AdvanSys ABP950UW

-   AdvanSys ABP970UW

-   AdvanSys ABP3940U2W

-   AdvanSys ABP3950U2W

The ahc(4) driver supports the following SCSI host adapter chips and
SCSI controller cards:

-   Adaptec AIC7770 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7850 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7860 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7870 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7880 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7890 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7891 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7892 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7895 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7896 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7897 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7899 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec 274X(W)

-   Adaptec 274X(T)

-   Adaptec 284X

-   Adaptec 2910

-   Adaptec 2915

-   Adaptec 2920

-   Adaptec 2930C

-   Adaptec 2930U2

-   Adaptec 2940

-   Adaptec 2940J

-   Adaptec 2940N

-   Adaptec 2940U

-   Adaptec 2940AU

-   Adaptec 2940UW

-   Adaptec 2940UW Dual

-   Adaptec 2940UW Pro

-   Adaptec 2940U2W

-   Adaptec 2940U2B

-   Adaptec 2950U2W

-   Adaptec 2950U2B

-   Adaptec 19160B

-   Adaptec 29160B

-   Adaptec 29160N

-   Adaptec 3940

-   Adaptec 3940U

-   Adaptec 3940AU

-   Adaptec 3940UW

-   Adaptec 3940AUW

-   Adaptec 3940U2W

-   Adaptec 3950U2

-   Adaptec 3960

-   Adaptec 39160

-   Adaptec 3985

-   Adaptec 4944UW

-   NEC PC-9821Xt13 (PC-98)

-   NEC RvII26 (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B02L/B09 (PC-98)

-   NEC SV-98/2-B03 (PC-98)

-   Many motherboards with on-board SCSI support

The adapters supported by the aic(4) driver include:

-   Adaptec AHA-1505 (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1510A, AHA-1510B (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1520A, AHA-1520B (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1522A, AHA-1522B (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1535 (ISA)

-   Creative Labs SoundBlaster SCSI host adapter (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1460, AHA-1460B, AHA-1460C, AHA-1460D (PC Card)

-   Adaptec AHA-1030B, AHA-1030P (PC98)

-   NEC PC-9801-100 (PC98)

Controllers supported by the amd(4) driver include:

-   MELCO IFC-DP (PC-98)

-   Tekram DC390

-   Tekram DC390T

Controllers supported by the amr(4) driver include:

-   MegaRAID SATA 150-4

-   MegaRAID SATA 150-6

-   MegaRAID SATA 300-4X

-   MegaRAID SATA 300-8X

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-1E

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-2E

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-4E

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-0X

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-2X

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-4X

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-0

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-1

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-2

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-4

-   MegaRAID Series 418

-   MegaRAID i4 133 RAID

-   MegaRAID Elite 1500 (Series 467)

-   MegaRAID Elite 1600 (Series 493)

-   MegaRAID Elite 1650 (Series 4xx)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1200 (Series 428)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1300 (Series 434)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1400 (Series 438)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1500 (Series 467)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1600 (Series 471)

-   MegaRAID Express 100 (Series 466WS)

-   MegaRAID Express 200 (Series 466)

-   MegaRAID Express 300 (Series 490)

-   MegaRAID Express 500 (Series 475)

-   Dell PERC

-   Dell PERC 2/SC

-   Dell PERC 2/DC

-   Dell PERC 3/DCL

-   Dell PERC 3/QC

-   Dell PERC 4/DC

-   Dell PERC 4/IM

-   Dell PERC 4/SC

-   Dell PERC 4/Di

-   Dell PERC 4e/DC

-   Dell PERC 4e/Di

-   Dell PERC 4e/Si

-   Dell PERC 4ei

-   HP NetRAID-1/Si

-   HP NetRAID-3/Si (D4943A)

-   HP Embedded NetRAID

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCS16

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCU42X

The ct(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   ELECOM bus-master SCSI adapters

-   I-O DATA SC-98II

-   ICM IF-2660, IF-2766, IF-2766ET, IF-2767 and IF-2769

-   Logitec LHA-N151 and LHA-20x series

-   Midori-Denshi MDC-554NA and MDC-926R

-   NEC PC-9801-55, 92 and compatibles

-   SMIT transfer type SCSI host adapters

-   TEXA HA-55BS2 and its later models

Cards supported by the isp(4) driver include:

-   ISP1000

-   ISP1020

-   ISP1040

-   Qlogic 1240

-   Qlogic 1020

-   Qlogic 1040

-   Qlogic 1080

-   Qlogic 1280

-   Qlogic 12160

-   Qlogic 210X

-   Qlogic 220X

-   Qlogic 2300

-   Qlogic 2312

-   Qlogic 234X

-   Qlogic 2322

-   Qlogic 200

-   Qlogic 2422

-   Qlogic 2432

The following controllers are supported by the mpt(4) driver:

-   LSI Logic 53c1030, LSI Logic LSI2x320-X (Single and Dual Ultra320
    SCSI)

-   LSI Logic AS1064, LSI Logic AS1068

-   LSI Logic FC909 (1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC909A (Dual 1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC919, LSI Logic 7102XP-LC (Single 2Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC929, LSI Logic FC929X, LSI Logic 7202XP-LC (Dual 2Gb/s
    Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC949X (Dual 4Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC949ES (Dual 4Gb/s Fibre Channel PCI-Express)

The Ultra 320 SCSI controller chips supported by the mpt(4) driver can
be found onboard on many systems including:

-   Dell PowerEdge 1750 thru 2850

-   IBM eServer xSeries 335

These systems also contain Integrated Raid Mirroring and Integrated Raid
Mirroring Enhanced which this driver also supports. The SAS controller
chips are also present on many new AMD/Opteron based systems, like the
Sun 4100. Note that this controller can drive both SAS and SATA drives
or a mix of them at the same time. The Integrated Raid Mirroring
available for these controllers is poorly supported at best. The Fibre
Channel controller chipset are supported by a broad variety of speeds
and systems. The Apple Fibre Channel HBA is in fact the FC949ES card.
This driver also supports target mode for Fibre Channel cards. This
support may be enabled by setting the desired role of the core via the
LSI Logic firmware utility that establishes what roles the card can take
on - no separate compilation is required.

The ncr(4) driver provides support for the following NCR/Symbios SCSI
controller chips:

-   53C810

-   53C810A

-   53C815

-   53C820

-   53C825A

-   53C860

-   53C875

-   53C875J

-   53C885

-   53C895

-   53C895A

-   53C896

-   53C1510D

The following add-on boards are known to be supported:

-   I-O DATA SC-98/PCI (PC-98)

-   I-O DATA SC-PCI (PC-98)

The following devices are currently supported by the ncv(4) driver:

-   I-O DATA PCSC-DV

-   KME KXLC002 (TAXAN ICD-400PN, etc.), KXLC004, and UJDCD450

-   Macnica Miracle SCSI-II mPS110

-   Media Intelligent MSC-110, MSC-200

-   NEC PC-9801N-J03R

-   New Media Corporation BASICS SCSI

-   Qlogic Fast SCSI

-   RATOC REX-9530, REX-5572 (SCSI only)

Controllers supported by the nsp(4) driver include:

-   Alpha-Data AD-PCS201

-   I-O DATA CBSC16

Controllers supported by the stg(4) driver include:

-   Adaptec 2920/A

-   Future Domain SCSI2GO

-   Future Domain TMC-18XX/3260

-   IBM SCSI PCMCIA Card

-   ICM PSC-2401 SCSI

-   MELCO IFC-SC

-   RATOC REX-5536, REX-5536AM, REX-5536M, REX-9836A

Note that the Adaptec 2920C is supported by the ahc(4) driver.

The sym(4) driver provides support for the following Symbios/LSI Logic
PCI SCSI controllers:

-   53C810

-   53C810A

-   53C815

-   53C825

-   53C825A

-   53C860

-   53C875

-   53C876

-   53C895

-   53C895A

-   53C896

-   53C897

-   53C1000

-   53C1000R

-   53C1010-33

-   53C1010-66

-   53C1510D

The SCSI controllers supported by sym(4) can be either embedded on a
motherboard, or on one of the following add-on boards:

-   ASUS SC-200, SC-896

-   Data Technology DTC3130 (all variants)

-   DawiControl DC2976UW

-   Diamond FirePort (all)

-   I-O DATA SC-UPCI (PC-98)

-   Logitec LHA-521UA (PC-98)

-   NCR cards (all)

-   Symbios cards (all)

-   Tekram DC390W, 390U, 390F, 390U2B, 390U2W, 390U3D, and 390U3W

-   Tyan S1365

With all supported SCSI controllers, full support is provided for
SCSI-I, SCSI-II, and SCSI-III peripherals, including hard disks, optical
disks, tape drives (including DAT, 8mm Exabyte, Mammoth, and DLT),
medium changers, processor target devices and CD-ROM drives. WORM
devices that support CD-ROM commands are supported for read-only access
by the CD-ROM drivers (such as cd(4)). WORM/CD-R/CD-RW writing support
is provided by cdrecord(1), which is a part of the sysutils/cdrtools
port in the Ports Collection.

The following CD-ROM type systems are supported at this time:

-   SCSI interface (also includes ProAudio Spectrum and SoundBlaster
    SCSI) (cd(4))

-   ATAPI IDE interface ( acd(4))

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2 Ethernet Interfaces

Adapters supported by the aue(4) driver include:

-   Abocom UFE1000, DSB650TX_NA

-   Accton USB320-EC, SpeedStream

-   ADMtek AN986, AN8511

-   Billionton USB100, USB100LP, USB100EL, USBE100

-   Corega Ether FEther USB-T, FEther USB-TX, FEther USB-TXS

-   D-Link DSB-650, DSB-650TX, DSB-650TX-PNA

-   Elecom LD-USBL/TX

-   Elsa Microlink USB2Ethernet

-   HP hn210e

-   I-O Data USB ETTX

-   Kingston KNU101TX

-   LinkSys USB10T adapters that contain the AN986 Pegasus chipset,
    USB10TA, USB10TX, USB100TX, USB100H1

-   MELCO LUA-TX, LUA2-TX

-   Netgear FA101

-   Planex UE-200TX

-   Sandberg USB to Network Link (model number 133-06)

-   Siemens Speedstream

-   SmartBridges smartNIC

-   SMC 2202USB

-   SOHOware NUB100

The axe(4) driver supports ASIX Electronics AX88172 based USB Ethernet
adapters including:

-   Buffalo (Melco Inc.) LUA-U2-KTX

-   D-Link DUB-E100, revision A

-   LinkSys USB200M

-   Netgear FA120

-   Sitecom LN-029

-   System TALKS Inc. SGC-X2UL

The bge(4) driver provides support for various NICs based on the
Broadcom BCM570x family of Gigabit Ethernet controller chips, including
the following:

-   3Com 3c996-SX (1000baseSX)

-   3Com 3c996-T (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Dell PowerEdge 1750 integrated BCM5704C NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Dell PowerEdge 2550 integrated BCM5700 NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Dell PowerEdge 2650 integrated BCM5703 NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   IBM x235 server integrated BCM5703x NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP Compaq dc7600 integrated BCM5752 NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP ProLiant NC7760 embedded Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP ProLiant NC7770 PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP ProLiant NC7781 embedded PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Netgear GA302T (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   SysKonnect SK-9D21 (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   SysKonnect SK-9D41 (1000baseSX)

The cue(4) driver supports CATC USB-EL1210A based USB Ethernet adapters
including:

-   Belkin F5U011/F5U111

-   CATC Netmate

-   CATC Netmate II

-   SmartBridges SmartLink

The dc(4) driver provides support for the following chipsets:

-   DEC/Intel 21143

-   ADMtek AL981 Comet, AN985 Centaur, ADM9511 Centaur II and ADM9513
    Centaur II

-   ASIX Electronics AX88140A and AX88141

-   Conexant LANfinity RS7112 (miniPCI)

-   Davicom DM9009, DM9100, DM9102 and DM9102A

-   Lite-On 82c168 and 82c169 PNIC

-   Lite-On/Macronix 82c115 PNIC II

-   Macronix 98713, 98713A, 98715, 98715A, 98715AEC-C, 98725, 98727 and
    98732

-   Xircom X3201 (cardbus only)

The following NICs are known to work with the dc(4) driver at this time:

-   3Com OfficeConnect 10/100B (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Abocom FE2500

-   Accton EN1217 (98715A)

-   Accton EN2242 MiniPCI

-   Adico AE310TX (98715A)

-   Alfa Inc GFC2204 (ASIX AX88140A)

-   Built in 10Mbps only Ethernet on Compaq Presario 7900 series
    desktops (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in DE500-BA on DEC Alpha workstations (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in Sun DMFE 10/100 Mbps Ethernet on Sun Netra X1 and Sun Fire
    V100 (DM9102A, MII)

-   Built in Ethernet on LinkSys EtherFast 10/100 Instant GigaDrive
    (DM9102, MII)

-   CNet Pro110B (ASIX AX88140A)

-   CNet Pro120A (98715A or 98713A) and CNet Pro120B (98715)

-   Compex RL100-TX (98713 or 98713A)

-   D-Link DFE-570TX (21143, MII, quad port)

-   Digital DE500-BA 10/100 (21143, non-MII)

-   ELECOM Laneed LD-CBL/TXA (ADMtek AN985)

-   Hawking CB102 CardBus

-   IBM EtherJet Cardbus Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 Mobile Cardbus (versions that use the X3201 chipset)

-   Jaton XpressNet (Davicom DM9102)

-   Kingston KNE100TX (21143, MII)

-   Kingston KNE110TX (PNIC 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v2.0 (PNIC II 82c115)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v4.0/4.1 (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Matrox FastNIC 10/100 (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   Melco LGY-PCI-TXL

-   Microsoft MN-120 10/100 CardBus (ADMTek Centaur-C)

-   Microsoft MN-130 10/100 PCI (ADMTek Centaur-P)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A (98713A)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A Rev B4 (98715AEC-C)

-   NetGear FA310-TX Rev. D1, D2 or D3 (PNIC 82c169)

-   Netgear FA511

-   PlaneX FNW-3602-T (ADMtek AN985)

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 1233A-TX (ADMtek AN985)

-   SVEC PN102-TX (98713)

-   Xircom Cardbus Realport

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet 10/100

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet II 10/100

Adapters supported by the de(4) driver include:

-   Adaptec ANA-6944/TX

-   Cogent EM100FX and EM440TX

-   Corega FastEther PCI-TX

-   D-Link DFE-500TX

-   DEC DE435, DEC DE450, and DEC DE500

-   ELECOM LD-PCI2T, LD-PCITS

-   I-O DATA LA2/T-PCI

-   SMC Etherpower 8432, 9332 and 9334

-   ZNYX ZX3xx

The ed(4) driver supports the following Ethernet NICs:

-   3Com 3c503 Etherlink II

-   AR-P500 Ethernet

-   Accton EN1644 (old model), EN1646 (old model), EN2203 (old model)
    (110pin) (flags 0xd00000)

-   Accton EN2212/EN2216/UE2216

-   Allied Telesis CentreCOM LA100-PCM_V2

-   Allied Telesis LA-98 (flags 0x000000) (PC-98)

-   Allied Telesis SIC-98, SIC-98NOTE (110pin), SIU-98 (flags 0x600000)
    (PC-98)

-   Allied Telesis SIU-98-D (flags 0x610000) (PC-98)

-   AmbiCom 10BaseT card

-   Bay Networks NETGEAR FA410TXC Fast Ethernet

-   Belkin F5D5020 PC Card Fast Ethernet

-   Billionton LM5LT-10B Ethernet/Modem PC Card

-   Bromax iPort 10/100 Ethernet PC Card

-   Bromax iPort 10 Ethernet PC Card

-   Buffalo LPC2-CLT, LPC3-CLT, LPC3-CLX, LPC4-TX PC Card

-   CNet BC40 adapter

-   Compex Net-A adapter

-   Contec C-NET(98), RT-1007(98), C-NET(9N) (110pin) (flags 0xa00000)
    (PC-98)

-   Contec C-NET(98)E-A, C-NET(98)L-A, C-NET(98)P (flags 0x300000)
    (PC-98)

-   Corega Ether98-T (flags 0x000000) (PC-98)

-   Corega Ether PCC-T/EtherII PCC-T/FEther PCC-TXF/PCC-TXD

-   CyQ've ELA-010

-   DEC EtherWorks DE305

-   Danpex EN-6200P2

-   D-Link DE-298, DE-298P (flags 0x500000) (PC-98)

-   D-Link DE-650/660

-   D-Link IC-CARD/IC-CARD+ Ethernet

-   ELECOM LD-98P (flags 0x500000) (PC-98)

-   ELECOM LD-BDN, LD-NW801G (flags 0x200000) (PC-98)

-   ELECOM Laneed LD-CDL/TX, LD-CDF, LD-CDS, LD-10/100CD, LD-CDWA
    (DP83902A)

-   HP PC Lan+ 27247B and 27252A

-   IBM Creditcard Ethernet I/II

-   ICM AD-ET2-T, DT-ET-25, DT-ET-T5, IF-2766ET, IF-2771ET, NB-ET-T
    (110pin) (flags 0x500000) (PC-98)

-   I-O DATA LA/T-98, LA/T-98SB, LA2/T-98, ET/T-98 (flags 0x900000)
    (PC-98)

-   I-O DATA ET2/T-PCI

-   I-O DATA PCLATE

-   Kansai KLA-98C/T (flags 0x900000) (PC-98)

-   Kingston KNE-PC2, CIO10T, KNE-PCM/x Ethernet

-   Linksys EC2T/PCMPC100/PCM100, PCMLM56

-   Linksys EtherFast 10/100 PC Card, Combo PCMCIA Ethernet Card
    (PCMPC100 V2)

-   Logitec LAN-98T (flags 0xb00000) (PC-98)

-   MACNICA Ethernet ME1 for JEIDA

-   MACNICA ME98 (flags 0x900000) (PC-98)

-   MACNICA NE2098 (flags 0x400000) (PC-98)

-   MELCO EGY-98 (flags 0x300000) (PC-98)

-   MELCO LGH-98, LGY-98, LGY-98-N (110pin), IND-SP, IND-SS (flags
    0x400000) (PC-98)

-   MELCO LGY-PCI-TR

-   MELCO LPC-T/LPC2-T/LPC2-CLT/LPC2-TX/LPC3-TX/LPC3-CLX

-   NDC Ethernet Instant-Link

-   NEC PC-9801-77, PC-9801-78 (flags 0x910000) (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9801-107, PC-9801-108 (flags 0x800000) (PC-98)

-   National Semiconductor InfoMover NE4100

-   NetGear FA-410TX

-   NetVin 5000

-   Network Everywhere Ethernet 10BaseT PC Card

-   Networld 98X3 (flags 0xd00000) (PC-98)

-   Networld EC-98X, EP-98X (flags 0xd10000) (PC-98)

-   New Media LANSurfer 10+56 Ethernet/Modem

-   New Media LANSurfer

-   Novell NE1000/NE2000/NE2100

-   PLANEX ENW-8300-T

-   PLANEX EN-2298-C (flags 0x200000) (PC-98)

-   PLANEX EN-2298P-T, EN-2298-T (flags 0x500000) (PC-98)

-   PLANEX FNW-3600-T

-   Psion 10/100 LANGLOBAL Combine iT

-   RealTek 8029

-   Relia Combo-L/M-56k PC Card

-   SMC Elite 16 WD8013

-   SMC Elite Ultra

-   SMC EtherEZ98 (flags 0x000000) (PC-98)

-   SMC WD8003E/WD8003EBT/WD8003S/WD8003SBT/WD8003W/WD8013EBT/WD8013W
    and clones

-   SMC EZCard PC Card, 8040-TX, 8041-TX

-   Socket LP-E, ES-1000 Ethernet/Serial, LP-E CF, LP-FE CF

-   Surecom EtherPerfect EP-427

-   Surecom NE-34

-   TDK 3000/3400/5670 Fast Etherenet/Modem

-   TDK LAK-CD031, Grey Cell GCS2000 Ethernet Card

-   TDK DFL5610WS Ethernet/Modem PC Card

-   Telecom Device SuperSocket RE450T

-   VIA VT86C926

-   Winbond W89C940

C-Bus, ISA, PCI and PC Card devices are supported.

The em(4) driver supports Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the Intel
82540, 82541ER, 82541PI, 82542, 82543, 82544, 82545, 82546, 82546EB,
82546GB, 82547, 82571, 82572 and 82573 controller chips:

-   Intel PRO/1000 CT Network Connection (82547)

-   Intel PRO/1000 F Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 Gigabit Server Adapter (82542)

-   Intel PRO/1000 GT Desktop Adapter (82541PI)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Dual Port Server Adapter (82546)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Server Adapter (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Server Adapter (LX) (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Desktop Adapter (82540)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Desktop Adapter (82541)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Dual Port Server Adapter (82546)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Quad Port Server Adapter (82546EB)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Server Adapter (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Desktop Adapter (82544)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 XF Server Adapter (82544)

-   Intel PRO/1000 XT Server Adapter (82544)

The ep(4) driver supports Ethernet adapters based on the 3Com 3C5x9
Etherlink III Parallel Tasking chipset, including:

-   3Com 3C1 CF

-   3Com 3C509-TP, 3C509-BNC, 3C509-Combo, 3C509-TPO, 3C509-TPC ISA

-   3Com 3C509B-TP, 3C509B-BNC, 3C509B-Combo, 3C509B-TPO, 3C509B-TPC ISA

-   3Com 3C529, 3C529-TP MCA

-   3Com 3C562/3C563 PCMCIA

-   3Com 3C569B-J-TPO, 3C569B-J-COMBO CBUS

-   3Com 3C574, 3C574TX, 3C574-TX, 3CCFE574BT, 3CXFE574BT, 3C3FE574BT
    PCMCIA

-   3Com 3C579-TP, 3C579-BNC EISA

-   3Com 3C589, 3C589B, 3C589C, 3C589D, 3CXE589DT PCMCIA

-   3Com 3CCFEM556B, 3CCFEM556BI PCMCIA

-   3Com 3CXE589EC, 3CCE589EC, 3CXE589ET, 3CCE589ET PCMCIA

-   3Com Megahertz 3CCEM556, 3CXEM556, 3CCEM556B, 3CXEM556B, 3C3FEM556C
    PCMCIA

-   3Com OfficeConnect 3CXSH572BT, 3CCSH572BT PCMCIA

-   Farallon EtherWave and EtherMac PC Card (P/n 595/895 with BLUE
    arrow)

Controllers and cards supported by the fe(4) driver include:

-   Allied Telesis RE1000, RE1000Plus, ME1500 (110-pin)

-   CONTEC C-NET(98)P2, C-NET (9N)E (110-pin), C-NET(9N)C (ExtCard)

-   CONTEC C-NET(PC)C PCMCIA Ethernet

-   Eagle Tech NE200T

-   Eiger Labs EPX-10BT

-   Fujitsu FMV-J182, FMV-J182A

-   Fujitsu MB86960A, MB86965A

-   Fujitsu MBH10303, MBH10302 Ethernet PCMCIA

-   Fujitsu Towa LA501 Ethernet

-   HITACHI HT-4840-11

-   NextCom J Link NC5310

-   RATOC REX-5588, REX-9822, REX-4886, and REX-R280

-   RATOC REX-9880/9881/9882/9883

-   TDK LAC-98012, LAC-98013, LAC-98025, LAC-9N011 (110-pin)

-   TDK LAK-CD021, LAK-CD021A, LAK-CD021BX

-   Ungermann-Bass Access/PC N98C+(PC85152, PC85142), Access/NOTE
    N98(PC86132) (110-pin)

Adapters supported by the fxp(4) driver include:

-   Intel EtherExpress PRO/10

-   Intel InBusiness 10/100

-   Intel PRO/100B / EtherExpressPRO/100 B PCI Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100+ Management Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 VE Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 M Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 S Desktop, Server and Dual-Port Server Adapters

-   Contec C-NET(PI)-100TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821Ra20, Rv20, Xv13, Xv20 internal 100Base-TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B06 (PC-98)

-   Many on-board network interfaces on Intel motherboards

The hme(4) driver supports the on-board Ethernet interfaces of many Sun
UltraSPARC workstation and server models. Cards supported by the hme(4)
driver include:

-   Sun PCI SunSwift Adapter

-   Sun SBus SunSwift Adapter “( hme” and “SUNW,hme”)

-   Sun PCI Sun100BaseT Adapter 2.0

-   Sun SBus Sun100BaseT 2.0

-   Sun PCI Quad FastEthernet Controller

-   Sun SBus Quad FastEthernet Controller

The kue(4) driver supports Kawasaki LSI KL5KLUSB101B based USB Ethernet
adapters including:

-   3Com 3c19250

-   3Com 3c460 HomeConnect Ethernet USB Adapter

-   ADS Technologies USB-10BT

-   AOX USB101

-   ATen UC10T

-   Abocom URE 450

-   Corega USB-T

-   D-Link DSB-650C

-   Entrega NET-USB-E45, NET-HUB-3U1E

-   I/O Data USB ETT

-   Kawasaki DU-H3E

-   LinkSys USB10T

-   Netgear EA101

-   Peracom USB Ethernet Adapter

-   Psion Gold Port USB Ethernet adapter

-   SMC 2102USB, 2104USB

Adapters supported by the lge(4) driver include:

-   SMC TigerCard 1000 (SMC9462SX)

-   D-Link DGE-500SX

The lnc(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Diamond HomeFree

-   Hewlett Packard Vectra 486/66XM

-   Hewlett Packard Vectra XU

-   Isolan AT 4141-0 (16 bit)

-   Isolan BICC

-   Isolink 4110 (8 bit)

-   Novell NE2100

-   Novell NE32-VL

Also supported are adapters working with the pcn(4) driver. The lnc(4)
driver runs these in compatibility mode, thus the pcn(4) driver should
be preferred.

The my(4) driver provides support for various NICs based on the Myson
chipset. Supported models include:

-   Myson MTD800 PCI Fast Ethernet chip

-   Myson MTD803 PCI Fast Ethernet chip

-   Myson MTD89X PCI Gigabit Ethernet chip

The nge(4) driver supports National Semiconductor DP83820 and DP83821
based Gigabit Ethernet adapters including:

-   Addtron AEG320T

-   Ark PC SOHO-GA2500T (32-bit PCI) and SOHO-GA2000T (64-bit PCI)

-   Asante FriendlyNet GigaNIX 1000TA and 1000TPC

-   D-Link DGE-500T

-   LinkSys EG1032 (32-bit PCI) and EG1064 (64-bit PCI)

-   Netgear GA621

-   Netgear GA622T

-   SMC EZ Card 1000 (SMC9462TX)

-   Surecom Technology EP-320G-TX

-   Trendware TEG-PCITX (32-bit PCI) and TEG-PCITX2 (64-bit PCI)

The pcn(4) driver supports adapters and embedded controllers based on
the AMD PCnet/FAST, PCnet/FAST+, PCnet/FAST III, PCnet/PRO and
PCnet/Home Fast Ethernet chips:

-   AMD Am79C971 PCnet-FAST

-   AMD Am79C972 PCnet-FAST+

-   AMD Am79C973/Am79C975 PCnet-FAST III

-   AMD Am79C976 PCnet-PRO

-   AMD Am79C978 PCnet-Home

-   Allied-Telesis LA-PCI

The re(4) driver supports RealTek RTL8139C+, RTL8169, RTL816xS,
RTL811xS, and RTL8101E based Fast Ethernet and Gigabit Ethernet adapters
including:

-   Alloy Computer Products EtherGOLD 1439E 10/100 (8139C+)

-   Compaq Evo N1015v Integrated Ethernet (8139C+)

-   Corega CG-LAPCIGT Gigabit Ethernet (8169S)

-   D-Link DGE-528(T) Gigabit Ethernet (8169S)

-   Gigabyte 7N400 Pro2 Integrated Gigabit Ethernet (8110S)

-   LevelOne GNC-0105T (8169S)

-   LinkSys EG1032 (32-bit PCI)

-   PLANEX COMMUNICATIONS Inc. GN-1200TC (8169S)

-   Xterasys XN-152 10/100/1000 NIC (8169)

Adapters supported by the rl(4) driver include:

-   Accton “Cheetah” EN1207D (MPX 5030/5038; RealTek 8139 clone)

-   Allied Telesyn AT2550

-   Allied Telesyn AT2500TX

-   Belkin F5D5000

-   BUFFALO (Melco INC.) LPC-CB-CLX (CardBus)

-   Compaq HNE-300

-   CompUSA no-name 10/100 PCI Ethernet NIC

-   Corega FEther CB-TXD

-   Corega FEtherII CB-TXD

-   D-Link DFE-528TX

-   D-Link DFE-530TX+

-   D-Link DFE-538TX

-   D-Link DFE-690TXD

-   Edimax EP-4103DL CardBus

-   Encore ENL832-TX 10/100 M PCI

-   Farallon NetLINE 10/100 PCI

-   Genius GF100TXR

-   GigaFast Ethernet EE100-AXP

-   KTX-9130TX 10/100 Fast Ethernet

-   LevelOne FPC-0106TX

-   Longshine LCS-8038TX-R

-   NDC Communications NE100TX-E

-   Netronix Inc. EA-1210 NetEther 10/100

-   Nortel Networks 10/100BaseTX

-   OvisLink LEF-8129TX

-   OvisLink LEF-8139TX

-   Peppercon AG ROL-F

-   Planex FNW-3603-TX

-   Planex FNW-3800-TX

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 PCI 1211-TX

-   SOHO (PRAGMATIC) UE-1211C

The rue(4) driver supports RealTek RTL8150 based USB Ethernet adapters
including:

-   Buffalo (Melco Inc.) LUA-KTX

-   Green House GH-USB100B

-   LinkSys USB100M

-   Billionton 10/100 FastEthernet USBKR2

Adapters supported by the sf(4) driver include:

-   ANA-62011 64-bit single port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62022 64-bit dual port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62044 64-bit quad port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-69011 32-bit single port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62020 64-bit single port 100baseFX adapter

The sis(4) driver supports Silicon Integrated Systems SiS 900 and SiS
7016 based Fast Ethernet adapters and embedded controllers, as well as
Fast Ethernet adapters based on the National Semiconductor DP83815
(MacPhyter) and DP83816 chips. Supported adapters include:

-   @Nifty FNECHARD IFC USUP-TX

-   MELCO LGY-PCI-TXC

-   Netgear FA311-TX (DP83815)

-   Netgear FA312-TX (DP83815)

-   SiS 630, 635, and 735 motherboard chipsets

-   Soekris Engineering net45xx, net48xx, lan1621, and lan1641

Adapters supported by the sk(4) driver include:

-   3Com 3C940 single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   3Com 3C2000-T single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   Belkin F5D5005 single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   D-Link DGE-530T single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   Linksys EG1032 single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9521 SK-NET GE-T single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9821 SK-NET GE-T single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9822 SK-NET GE-T dual port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9841 SK-NET GE-LX single port, single mode fiber adapter

-   SK-9842 SK-NET GE-LX dual port, single mode fiber adapter

-   SK-9843 SK-NET GE-SX single port, multimode fiber adapter

-   SK-9844 SK-NET GE-SX dual port, multimode fiber adapter

-   SMC 9452TX single port, 1000baseT adapter

The snc(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   National Semiconductor DP83934AVQB

-   NEC PC-9801-83

-   NEC PC-9801-84

-   NEC PC-9801-103

-   NEC PC-9801-104

-   NEC PC-9801N-15

-   NEC PC-9801N-25

-   NEC PC-9801N-J02 PCMCIA

-   NEC PC-9801N-J02R PCMCIA

The snc(4) driver also includes support for the National Semiconductor
NS46C46 as 64 * 16 bits Microwave Serial EEPROM.

The ste(4) driver supports Sundance Technologies ST201 based Fast
Ethernet adapters and embedded controllers including:

-   D-Link DFE-530TXS

-   D-Link DFE-550TX

-   D-Link DFE-580TX

The ti(4) driver supports Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the Alteon
Tigon I and II chips. The ti(4) driver has been tested with the
following adapters:

-   3Com 3c985-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter (Tigon 1)

-   3Com 3c985B-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter (Tigon 2)

-   Alteon AceNIC V Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseSX)

-   Alteon AceNIC V Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseT)

-   Digital EtherWORKS 1000SX PCI Gigabit adapter

-   Netgear GA620 Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseSX)

-   Netgear GA620T Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseT)

The following adapters should also be supported but have not yet been
tested:

-   Asante GigaNIX1000T Gigabit Ethernet adapter

-   Asante PCI 1000BASE-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter

-   Farallon PN9000SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter

-   NEC Gigabit Ethernet

-   Silicon Graphics PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapter

The tl(4) driver supports Texas Instruments ThunderLAN based Ethernet
and Fast Ethernet adapters including a large number of Compaq PCI
Ethernet adapters. Also supported are:

-   Olicom OC-2135/2138 10/100 TX UTP adapter

-   Olicom OC-2325/OC-2326 10/100 TX UTP adapter

-   Racore 8148 10baseT/100baseTX/100baseFX adapter

-   Racore 8165 10/100baseTX adapter

The tl(4) driver also supports the built-in Ethernet adapters of various
Compaq Prosignia servers and Compaq Deskpro desktop machines including:

-   Compaq Netelligent 10

-   Compaq Netelligent 10 T PCI UTP/Coax

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 Dual-Port

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 Proliant

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 TX Embedded UTP

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 TX UTP

-   Compaq NetFlex 3P

-   Compaq NetFlex 3P Integrated

-   Compaq NetFlex 3P w/BNC

SMC 83c17x (EPIC)-based Ethernet NICs (tx(4) driver)

The txp(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   3Com 3CR990-TX-95

-   3Com 3CR990-TX-97

-   3Com 3cR990B-TXM

-   3Com 3CR990SVR95

-   3Com 3CR990SVR97

-   3Com 3cR990B-SRV

The udav(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Corega FEther USB-TXC

The vge(4) driver supports VIA Networking VT3119 and VT6122 based
Gigabit Ethernet adapters including:

-   VIA Networking LAN-on-motherboard Gigabit Ethernet

-   ZyXEL GN650-T 64-bit PCI Gigabit Ethernet NIC (ZX1701)

-   ZyXEL GN670-T 32-bit PCI Gigabit Ethernet NIC (ZX1702)

The vr(4) driver supports VIA Technologies Rhine I, Rhine II, and Rhine
III based Fast Ethernet adapters including:

-   AOpen/Acer ALN-320

-   D-Link DFE530-TX

-   Hawking Technologies PN102TX

The vx(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   3Com 3c590 EtherLink III PCI

-   3Com 3c592 EtherLink III EISA

-   3Com 3c595 Fast EtherLink III PCI in 10 Mbps mode

-   3Com 3c597 Fast EtherLink III EISA in 10 Mbps mode

The wb(4) driver supports Winbond W89C840F based Fast Ethernet adapters
and embedded controllers including:

-   Trendware TE100-PCIE

The xl(4) driver supports the following hardware:

-   3Com 3c900-TPO

-   3Com 3c900-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905-TX

-   3Com 3c905-T4

-   3Com 3c900B-TPO

-   3Com 3c900B-TPC

-   3Com 3c900B-FL

-   3Com 3c900B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905B-T4

-   3Com 3c905B-TX

-   3Com 3c905B-FX

-   3Com 3c905B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905C-TX

-   3Com 3c980, 3c980B, and 3c980C server adapters

-   3Com 3cSOHO100-TX OfficeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c450 HomeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c555, 3c556 and 3c556B mini-PCI adapters

-   3Com 3C3SH573BT, 3C575TX, 3CCFE575BT, 3CXFE575BT, 3CCFE575CT,
    3CXFE575CT, 3CCFEM656, 3CCFEM656B, and 3CCFEM656C, 3CXFEM656,
    3CXFEM656B, and 3CXFEM656C CardBus adapters

-   3Com 3c905-TX, 3c905B-TX 3c905C-TX, 3c920B-EMB, and 3c920B-EMB-WNM
    embedded adapters

Both the 3C656 family of CardBus cards and the 3C556 family of MiniPCI
cards have a built-in proprietary modem. Neither the xl(4) driver nor
any other driver supports this modem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.3 Token Ring Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.4 FDDI Interfaces

DEC DEFPA PCI ( fpa(4) driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.5 ATM Interfaces

Midway-based ATM interfaces (en(4) driver)

FORE Systems, Inc. PCA-200E ATM PCI Adapters (hfa and fatm(4) drivers)

IDT NICStAR 77201/211-based ATM Adapters ( idt(4) driver)

FORE Systems, Inc. HE155 and HE622 ATM interfaces ( hatm(4) driver)

IDT77252-based ATM cards ( patm(4) driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.6 Wireless Network Interfaces

Cisco/Aironet 802.11b wireless adapters (an(4) driver)

The ath(4) driver supports all Atheros Cardbus or PCI cards, except
those that are based on the AR5005VL chipset. A list of cards that are
supported can be found at
http://customerproducts.atheros.com/customerproducts/default.asp.

Cards supported by the awi(4) driver include:

-   BayStack 650

-   BayStack 660

-   Icom SL-200

-   Melco WLI-PCM

-   NEL SSMagic

-   Netwave AirSurfer Plus

-   Netwave AirSurfer Pro

-   Nokia C020 WLAN

-   Farallon SkyLINE

The original Xircom Netwave AirSurfer is supported by the cnw(4) driver.

Cards supported by the cnw(4) driver include:

-   Xircom CreditCard Netwave

-   NetWave AirSurfer

[i386, amd64] Intel PRO/Wireless 2100 MiniPCI network adapter ( ipw(4)
driver)

[i386, amd64] Intel PRO/Wireless 2200BG/2915ABG MiniPCI and 2225BG PCI
network adapters ( iwi(4) driver)

Raytheon Raylink 2.4GHz wireless adapters ( ray(4) driver)

Lucent Technologies WaveLAN/IEEE 802.11b wireless network adapters and
workalikes using the Lucent Hermes, Intersil PRISM-II, Intersil
PRISM-2.5, Intersil Prism-3, and Symbol Spectrum24 chipsets (wi(4)
driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.7 Miscellaneous Networks

The ce(4) driver supports the following models of Tau-PCI/32 WAN
adapters:

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI/32

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI/32-Lite

The cp(4) driver supports the following models of Tau-PCI WAN adapters:

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI/R

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-L

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-L/R

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-E1

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-G703

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-2E1

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-4E1

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-E3

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-T3

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-STS1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.8 ISDN Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.9 Serial Interfaces

Internel serial interfaces ( sio(4) driver)

-   PC-9801 on-board

-   PC-9821 2'nd CCU (flags 0x12000000)

NEC PC-9861K, PC-9801-101 and Midori-Denshi MDC-926Rs ( sio(4) driver)

-   COM2 (flags 0x01000000)

-   COM3 (flags 0x02000000)

NEC PC-9801-120 ( sio(4) driver)

  Note: "flags 0x11000000" is necessary in kernel configuration.

Microcore MC-16550, MC-16550II, MC-RS98 ( sio(4) driver)

  Note: "flags 0x14000?01" is necessary in kernel configuration.

Media Intelligent RSB-2000, RSB-3000 and AIWA B98-02 ( sio(4) driver)

  Note: "flags 0x15000?01" is necessary in kernel configuration.

Media Intelligent RSB-384 ( sio(4) driver)

  Note: "flags 0x16000001" is necessary in kernel configuration.

I-O DATA RSA-98III ( sio(4) driver)

  Note: "flags 0x18000?01" is necessary in kernel configuration.

Hayes ESP98 ( sio(4) driver)

  Note: "options COM_ESP" and "flags 0x19000000" are necessary in kernel
  configuration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.10 Sound Devices

NEC PC-9801-73, 86 and compatibles (nss driver)

-   NEC A-MATE internal sound

-   Q-Vision WaveStar, WaveMaster

NEC X-MATE, CanBe, ValueStar internal (mss driver)

Creative Technologies SoundBlaster(98) (sb(4) driver)

I-O DATA CD-BOX (sb(4) driver)

MPU-401 and compatible interfaces (mpu driver)

-   Q-Vision WaveStar

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.11 Camera and Video Capture Devices

The bktr(4) driver supports video capture cards based on the Brooktree
Bt848/849/878/879 chips, as well as Pinnacle PCTV cards, including:

-   AOpen VA1000

-   AVerMedia AVerTV Studio

-   AVerMedia TF/FM-98

-   ATI TV Wonder VE

-   Hauppauge WinCast/TV

-   Hauppauge WinTV-Go-FM

-   Hauppauge WinTV-pci

-   Hauppauge WinTV-radio

-   Intel Smart Video Recorder III

-   KWORLD PCI TV Tuner

-   Miro PC TV

-   Pinnacle PCTV Pro

-   Pinnacle PCTV Rave

-   PixelView PlayTV PAK

-   PixelView PlayTV Pro (rev 4C, 9D)

-   SIGMA TV II

-   STB TV PCI Television Tuner

-   Super TV Tuner

-   TerraTec TValue

-   V-Stream XPERT TV-PVR 878

-   Video Highway XTreme

-   VideoLogic Captivator PCI

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.12 USB Devices

A range of USB peripherals are supported; devices known to work are
listed in this section. Owing to the generic nature of most USB devices,
with some exceptions any device of a given class will be supported, even
if not explicitly listed here.

  Note: USB Ethernet adapters can be found in the section listing
  Ethernet interfaces.

  Note: USB Bluetooth adapters can be found in Bluetooth section.

The ohci(4) driver supports all OHCI v1.0 compliant controllers
including:

-   AcerLabs M5237 (Aladdin-V)

-   AMD-756

-   OPTi 82C861 (FireLink)

-   NEC uPD 9210

-   CMD Tech 670 (USB0670)

-   CMD Tech 673 (USB0673)

-   NVIDIA nForce3

-   Sun PCIO-2 (RIO USB)

The uhci(4) driver supports all UHCI v1.1 compliant controllers
including:

-   Intel 82371AB/EB (PIIX4)

-   Intel 82371SB (PIIX3)

-   VIA 83C572

USB 2.0 controllers using the EHCI interface ( ehci(4) driver)

Hubs

Keyboards ( ukbd(4) driver)

Miscellaneous

-   Assist Computer Systems PC Camera C-M1

-   ActiveWire I/O Board

-   Creative Technology Video Blaster WebCam Plus

-   D-Link DSB-R100 USB Radio ( ufm(4) driver)

-   Mirunet AlphaCam Plus

The following devices are supported by the urio(4) driver:

-   Diamond MultiMedia Rio 500

-   Diamond MultiMedia Rio 600

-   Diamond MultiMedia Rio 800

Devices supported by the umodem(4) driver include:

-   3Com 5605

-   Curitel PC5740 Wireless Modem

-   Metricom Ricochet GS USB wireless modem

-   Sierra MC5720 Wireless Modem

-   Yamaha Broadband Wireless Router RTW65b

-   ELSA MicroLink 56k USB modem

Mice ( ums(4) driver)

The ulpt(4) driver provides support for USB printers and parallel
printer conversion cables, including the following:

-   ATen parallel printer adapter

-   Belkin F5U002 parallel printer adapter

-   Canon BJ F850, S600

-   Canon LBP-1310, 350

-   Entrega USB-to-parallel printer adapter

-   Hewlett-Packard HP Deskjet 3420 (P/N: C8947A #ABJ)

-   Oki Data MICROLINE ML660PS

-   Seiko Epson PM-900C, 880C, 820C, 730C

The ubsa(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   AnyData ADU-E100A (no EV-DO mode support)

-   Belkin F5U103

-   Belkin F5U120

-   e-Tek Labs Kwik232

-   GoHubs GoCOM232

-   Huawei Technologies Mobile card (3G)

-   Novatel Wireless Merlin U740 (only basic modem port supported)

-   Option Globetrotter 3G (aka Vodafone Mobile Connect Card 3G)

-   Option Globetrotter 3G Quad

-   Option Globetrotter 3G Fusion (no WLAN support, only basic 3G modem
    port)

-   Option Globetrotter 3G Fusion Quad (no WLAN support)

-   Peracom single port serial adapter

-   Qualcomm, Inc. ZTE CDMA Technologies MSM

The supported 3G cards provide the necessary modem port for ppp, pppd,
or mpd connections; other functions of these cards (diagnostic port, SIM
toolkit port, WLAN) are not supported.

The ubser(4) driver provides support for the BWCT console management
serial adapters.

The uftdi(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   B&B Electronics USB->RS422/485 adapter

-   HP USB-Serial adapter shipped with some HP laptops

-   Inland UAS111

-   QVS USC-1000

The uplcom(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   ATEN UC-232A

-   BAFO BF-800

-   BAFO BF-810

-   ELECOM UC-SGT

-   HAL Corporation Crossam2+USB IR commander

-   Hama USB RS-232 Serial Adapter

-   IOGEAR UC-232A

-   I/O DATA USB-RSAQ

-   I/O DATA USB-RSAQ2

-   I/O DATA USB-RSAQ3

-   PLANEX USB-RS232 URS-03

-   RATOC REX-USB60

-   Sandberg USB to Serial Link (model number 133-08)

-   SOURCENEXT KeikaiDenwa 8 (with and without charger)

-   Sony Ericsson USB Cable (Susteen USB Data Cable)

The umct(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Belkin F5U109

-   Belkin F5U409

-   D-Link DU-H3SP USB BAY Hub

-   Magic Control Technology USB-232

-   Sitecom USB-232

Because there is no standard device class for USB scanners, this driver
will only recognise devices whose USB IDs are explicitly listed in the
table in the driver itself. The following devices are supported to date:

-   Acer Acerscan: 320U, 620U, 640U, 640BT, 1240U, C310U;

-   AGFA SnapScan: 1212U, 1236U, e20, e25, e26, e40, e50, e52, SnapScan
    Touch;

-   Avision 1200U

-   Canon CanoScan: D660U, N656U, N676U, N1220U, LIDE 20, LIDE 25, LIDE
    30;

-   Epson Perfection: 610, 636U / 636Photo, 640U, 1200U / 1200Photo,
    1240U / 1240Photo, 1250, 1260, 1270, 1600, 1640SU, 1650, 1660, 1670,
    2480, 3200, 3500, 3590, 4200, 4990;

-   Epson: GT-8400UF, GT-9300UF, GT-9700F;

-   Epson Stylus: Photo RX425, CX3650, DX-5000, DX-5050, DX-6000,
    DX-6050 (and possibly more in the CX-5000 and DX-3800..DX-7000
    family);

-   Hewlett Packard: Photosmart S20

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet: 2200C, 3300C, 3400CSE, 4100C, 4200C, 4300C,
    5200C, 5300C, 5400C, 6200C, 6300C, 8200C, 8250C, 8290C;

-   KYE ColorPage Vivid-Pro

-   Microtek Phantom: 336CX, C6;

-   Microtek ScanMaker: V6UL V6USL, X6U;

-   Minolta 5400

-   Mustek: 600 CU, 1200 CU, 1200 UB, 1200 USB;

-   Mustek BearPaw: 1200F, 1200TA;

-   NatSemi BearPaw 1200

-   Nikon CoolScan LS40 ED

-   Primax 6200

-   Primax Colorado: 1200u, 600u, USB 19200, USB 9600;

-   Primax: G2-200, G2-300, G2-600, G2600, G2E-300, G2E-3002, G2E-600,
    G2E600, G2X-300, G600, ReadyScan 636i;

-   Ultima 1200 UB Plus

-   UMAX Astra: 1220U, 1236U, 2000U, 2100U, 2200U, 3400;

-   Visioneer OneTouch: 3000, 5300, 7600, 6100, 6200, 8100, 8600;

The umass(4) driver supports USB Mass Storage devices, including:

-   ADTEC Stick Drive AD-UST32M, 64M, 128M, 256M

-   Denno FireWire/USB2 Removable 2.5-inch HDD Case MIFU-25CB20

-   FujiFilm Zip USB Drive ZDR100 USB A

-   GREEN HOUSE USB Flash Memory "PicoDrive" GH-UFD32M, 64M, 128M

-   IBM 32MB USB Memory Key (P/N 22P5296)

-   IBM 256MB USB Drive (MSYSTEM DiskOnKey2)

-   IBM ThinkPad USB Portable CD-ROM Drive (P/N 33L5151)

-   I-O DATA USB CD/CD-R/CD-RW/DVD-R/DVD-RW/DVD-RAM/DVD-ROM Drive
    DVR-iUH2 (CDROM, DVD-RAM only)

-   I-O DATA USB x6 CD-RW Drive CDRW-i64/USB (CDROM only)

-   I-O DATA USB/IEEE1394 Portable HD Drive HDP-i30P/CI, HDP-i40P/CI

-   Iomega USB Zip 100/250 drive

-   Iomega Zip750 USB2.0 drive

-   Keian USB1.1/2.0 3.5-inch HDD Case KU350A

-   Kurouto Shikou USB 2.5-inch HDD Case GAWAP2.5PS-USB2.0

-   LaCie P3 HardDrive USB 200GB

-   Logitec LDR-H443U2 DVD-RAM/-R/+R/-RW/+RW drive

-   Logitec Mobile USB Memory LMC-256UD

-   Logitec USB1.1/2.0 HDD Unit SHD-E60U2

-   Logitec USB Double-Speed Floppy Drive LFD-31U2

-   Logitec USB/IEEE1394 DVD-RAM/R/RW Unit LDR-N21FU2 (CDROM only)

-   MELCO USB Flash Disk "ClipDrive", RUF-C32M, -C64M, -C128M, -C256M,
    -C512M

-   MELCO USB Flash Disk "PetitDrive", RUF-32M, -64M, -128M, -256Mm

-   MELCO USB2.0 Flash Disk "PetitDrive2", RUF-256M/U2, -512M/U2

-   MELCO USB2.0 MO Drive MO-CH640U2

-   Matshita CF-VFDU03 floppy drive

-   Merlin SM300 MP3/WMA Player (256Mb)

-   Microtech International, Inc. USB-SCSI-HD 50 USB to SCSI cable

-   Motorola E398 Mobile Phone (TransFlash memory card)

-   NOVAC USB2.0 2.5/3.5-inch HDD Case NV-HD351U

-   PNY Attache Flash Drive

-   Panasonic ("Matshita FDD CF-VFDU03")

-   Panasonic KXL-CB20AN Portable DVD-ROM/CD-R/RW

-   Panasonic KXL-CB35AN (DVD-ROM & CD-R/RW)

-   Panasonic USB2.0 Portable CD-RW Drive KXL-RW40AN (CDROM only)

-   Panasonic floppy drive

-   Qware BeatZkey! Pro

-   RATOC Systems USB2.0 Removable HDD Case U2-MDK1, U2-MDK1B

-   SanDisk SDDR-31 (Compact Flash)

-   SanDisk SDDR-75 (only Compact Flash port works)

-   Sitecom CN-300 MultiFlash (MMC/SD, SmartMedia, CF, MemoryStick)

-   Sony Portable CD-R/RW Drive CRX10U (CDROM only)

-   TEAC Portable USB CD-ROM Unit CD-110PU/210PU

-   Time DPA20B MP3 Player (1Gb)

-   Trek Thumbdrive 8MB

-   VAIO floppy drive (includes Y-E Data Flashbuster-U)

-   Y-E Data floppy drive (720/1.44/2.88Mb)

Among the supported digital cameras are:

-   Asahi Optical (PENTAX) Optio 230 & 330

Audio Devices ( uaudio(4) driver)

The uvisor(4) driver supports the following devices:

-   Aceeca Mez1000 RDA

-   Handspring Treo

-   Handspring Treo 600

-   Handspring Visor

-   Palm I705

-   Palm M125

-   Palm M130

-   Palm M500

-   Palm M505

-   Palm M515

-   Palm Tungsten T

-   Palm Tungsten Z

-   Palm Zire

-   Palm Zire 31

-   Sony Clie 4.0

-   Sony Clie 4.1

-   Sony Clie 5.0

-   Sony Clie PEG-S500C

-   Sony Clie NX60

-   Sony Clie S360

-   Sony Clie TJ37

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.13 IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Devices

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.14 Bluetooth Devices

The ng_bt3c(4) driver provides support for the 3Com/HP 3CRWB6096-A
PCCARD bluetooth adapter.

The ng_ubt(4) driver supports all Bluetooth USB devices that conform
with the Bluetooth specification v1.1, including:

-   3Com 3CREB96

-   AIPTEK BR0R02

-   EPoX BT-DG02

-   Mitsumi Bluetooth USB adapter

-   MSI MS-6967

-   TDK Bluetooth USB adapter

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.15 Cryptographic Accelerators

The hifn(4) driver supports various cards containing the Hifn 7751,
7951, 7811, 7955, and 7956 chipsets, such as:

-   Invertex AEON

-   Hifn 7751

-   PowerCrypt

-   XL-Crypt

-   NetSec 7751

-   Soekris Engineering vpn1201 and vpn1211

-   Soekris Engineering vpn1401 and vpn1411

The safe(4) driver supports cards containing any of the following chips:

-   SafeNet 1141

-   SafeNet 1741

The ubsec(4) driver supports cards containing any of the following
chips:

-   Bluesteel 5501

-   Bluesteel 5601

-   Broadcom BCM5801

-   Broadcom BCM5802

-   Broadcom BCM5805

-   Broadcom BCM5820

-   Broadcom BCM5821

-   Broadcom BCM5822

-   Broadcom BCM5823

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.16 Miscellaneous

FAX-Modem/PCCARD

-   MELCO IGM-PCM56K/IGM-PCM56KH

-   Nokia Card Phone 2.0 (gsm900/dcs1800 HSCSD terminal)

Floppy drives ( fdc(4) driver)

Keyboards including:

-   Standard keyboards

-   USB keyboards ( ukbd(4) driver)

Pointing devices including:

-   Bus mice and compatible devices ( mse(4) driver)

-   Serial mice and compatible devices

-   USB mice ( ums(4) driver)

  Note: moused(8) has more information on using pointing devices with
  FreeBSD. Information on using pointing devices with Xorg can be found
  at http://www.x.org/.

“PC-9821 standard” parallel ports ( ppc(4) driver)

Joystick port of SoundBlaster(98) ( joy(4) driver)

PHS Data Communication Card/PCCARD

-   NTT DoCoMo P-in Comp@ct

-   Panasonic KX-PH405

-   SII MC-P200

Power Management Controller of NEC PC-98 Note (pmc driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
