[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

FreeBSD Release Engineering Team

Links:
FreeBSD 13.1-RELEASE schedule URL:
https://www.freebsd.org/releases/13.1R/schedule/
FreeBSD 13.1-RELEASE announcement URL:
https://www.freebsd.org/releases/13.1R/announce/
FreeBSD releases URL: https://download.freebsd.org/releases/ISO-IMAGES/
FreeBSD development snapshots URL:
https://download.freebsd.org/snapshots/ISO-IMAGES/

Contact: FreeBSD Release Engineering Team, <re@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Release Engineering Team is responsible for setting and
publishing release schedules for official project releases of FreeBSD,
announcing code freezes and maintaining the respective branches, among
other things.

During the second quarter of 2022, the Release Engineering Team
completed work on the 13.1-RELEASE cycle. This is the second release
from the stable/13 branch. Throughout the release cycle, three BETA
builds and six RC (release candidate) builds have occurred, moving the
final release date from April 21, 2022 to May 16, 2022, as some
last-minute issues were identified.

We thank all FreeBSD developers and contributors for testing the
13.1-RELEASE, reporting problems, and being diligent with proposed
changes as the cycle progressed.

Additionally throughout the quarter, several development snapshots
builds were released for the main, stable/13, and stable/12 branches.

Sponsor: Rubicon Communications, LLC ("Netgate") Sponsor: The FreeBSD
Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: September 11, 2022 by Maxim Konovalov

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
