[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 8.1-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2010 The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: stable/8/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml
210450 2010-07-24 18:05:10Z hrs $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

SPARC, SPARC64, SPARCengine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. SPARC
International, Inc owns all of the SPARC trademarks and under licensing
agreements allows the proper use of these trademarks by its members.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “®” symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 8.1-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release or too late in
  the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
  documentation. This information includes security advisories, as well
  as news relating to the software or documentation that could affect
  its operation or usability. An up-to-date version of this document
  should always be consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 8.1-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 8.2-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains “late-breaking news” about FreeBSD
8.1-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the “current errata” for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 8-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

No advisory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Open Issues

No open issues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Late-Breaking News and Corrections

A deadlock can occur in UFS with the QUOTA enabled due to a lock order
reversal. This problem has been fixed in r209367 (HEAD). An Errata
Notice for 8.1-RELEASE is planned.

A legacy device detection in the ata(4) can fail in some cases.
Specifically, Marvell 88SX6141 controllers can cause attach failure or
panic. This problem has been fixed in r210168 (HEAD). An Errata Notice
for 8.1-RELEASE is planned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
