[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v 1.1.2.66
2002/05/20 22:27:52 bmah Exp $

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release. This information
  includes security advisories, as well as news relating to the software
  or documentation that could affect its operation or usability. An
  up-to-date version of this document should always be consulted before
  installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 4.6-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains ``late-breaking news'' about FreeBSD
4.5-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the ``current errata'' for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 4-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

A race condition existed whereby a file could be removed between a
fstatfs(2) call and the point where the file is accessed, causing a
kernel panic. Only the procfs(5) filesystem was known to be vulnerable
to this attack. This bug was fixed in FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE, but the
security advisory describing the bug was issued after the release. For
more information, including a workaround and bug fix, see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:09.

An ``off-by-one'' bug has been fixed in OpenSSH's multiplexing code.
This bug could have allowed an authenticated remote user to cause
sshd(8) to execute arbitrary code with superuser privileges, or allowed
a malicious SSH server to execute arbitrary code on the client system
with the privileges of the client user. Various workarounds and
bugfixes, for versions of OpenSSH in both the base system and Ports
Collection, can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:13.

A programming error in zlib could result in attempts to free memory
multiple times. The malloc(3)/ free(3) routines used in FreeBSD are not
vulnerable to this error, but applications receiving specially-crafted
blocks of invalid compressed data could be made to function incorrectly
or abort. This zlib bug has been fixed. For a workaround and solutions,
see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:18.

Bugs in the TCP SYN cache (``syncache'') and SYN cookie (``syncookie'')
implementations, which could cause legitimate TCP/IP traffic to crash a
machine, have been fixed. For a workaround and patches, see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:20.

A routing table memory leak, which could allow a remote attacker to
exhaust the memory of a target machine, has been fixed. A workaround and
patches can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:21.

A bug with memory-mapped I/O, which could cause a system crash, has been
fixed. For more information about a solution, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:22.

A security hole, in which SUID programs could be made to read from or
write to inappropriate files through manipulation of their standard I/O
file descriptors, has been fixed. Information regarding a solution can
be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:23.

Unlike su(1), k5su(8) does not require that an invoking user be a member
of the wheel group when attempting to become the superuser. This could
result in some unexpected behavior. To avoid this situation, k5su(8) is
now installed non-SUID by default (effectively disabling it). More
information can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:24.

Multiple vulnerabilities were found in the bzip2(1) utility, which could
allow files to be overwritten without warning or allow local users
unintended access to files. These problems have been corrected with a
new import of bzip2. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:25.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 System Update Information

Certain SSH clients, when attempting to connect to a FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE
server, will unexpectedly present an S/Key prompt, even if sshd(8) on
the server has not been later explicitly configured for S/Key
authentication. This is due to the default settings of clients having
changed (e.g. use of SSH protocol version 2 where it was not used
before), or from a change from the client's old default authentication
sequence. There are a number of ways to disable this behavior:

-   On newer OpenSSH clients, add the following line to your
    ~/.ssh/config file:

            PreferredAuthentications publickey,password,keyboard-interactive

-   For PuTTY clients, the authentication sequence order cannot be
    changed, but keyboard-interactive authentication can be disabled in
    the settings.

-   To disable keyboard-interactive authentication in the server,
    uncomment the following line in the /etc/ssh/sshd_config file (on
    the server host):

            ChallengeResponseAuthentication no

This problem has been corrected in FreeBSD 4.6-RC.

The release notes mentioned the new sbni device driver, but gave an
incorrect reference to the program in the FreeBSD Ports Collection used
to configure the driver. The correct filename for the port is
sysutils/sbniconfig.

Linux emulation now requires options SYSVSEM in the kernel
configuration. This dependency was introduced into FreeBSD before
4.5-RELEASE.

Packages containing some optional components of KDE were accidentally
omitted from the ISO images (and hence the official 4-CD set). In prior
releases, these packages could be installed using the x11/kde2 package.
These components can either be installed using the FreeBSD Ports
Collection or by downloading the binary packages from one of the FreeBSD
FTP servers. The affected ports are: games/kdegames2, misc/kdeutils2,
editors/koffice, net/kdenetwork2, graphics/kdegraphics2, and
audio/kdemultimedia2. Note that the x11/kdelibs2 and x11/kdebase2
packages, which are frequently required by these other components, are
included on disk 1 of the official 4-CD set. [1]

A binary package containing Samba was accidentally omitted from the ISO
images. This software can either be installed using the net/samba port
in the FreeBSD Ports Collection or by downloading and installing its
binary package from one of the FreeBSD FTP servers.

A bug has been fixed in soft updates that can cause occasional
filesystem corruption if the system is shut down immediately after
performing heavy filesystem activities, such as installing a new kernel
or other software. The system shutdown was unable to flush all buffers
on shutdown and would report this fact. The problem can be worked around
by running sync(8) a few times before rebooting, or solved by updating
to a recent FreeBSD 4.6-RC snapshot.

The ciss driver was inadvertently omitted from the FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE
GENERIC kernel, thus making it impossible (or at least very difficult)
to perform an initial install to disks attached to this controller. This
problem has been corrected in FreeBSD 4.6-RC.

Notes

  ----- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [1]   The complete FreeBSD package collection currently fills nine CDROMs. The official 4-CD set therefore only contains a subset of the available packages. Several FreeBSD vendors offer distributions that contain a more complete set of packages; a more complete collection can also be found on the FreeBSD FTP sites.
  ----- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://releng4.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 4-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
