[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Wazuh on FreeBSD

Links:
Wazuh URL: https://www.wazuh.com/

Contact: José Alonso Cárdenas Márquez <acm@FreeBSD.org>

Wazuh is a free and open source platform used for threat prevention,
detection, and response. It is capable of protecting workloads across
on-premises, virtualized, containerized, and cloud-based environments.

The Wazuh solution consists of an endpoint security agent, deployed to
the monitored systems, and a management server, which collects and
analyzes data gathered by the agents. Besides, Wazuh has been fully
integrated with the Elastic Stack or OpenSearch Stack, providing a
search engine and data visualization tool that allows users to navigate
through their security alerts.

Wazuh porting to FreeBSD was started by Michael Muenz. The first Wazuh
port he added to the FreeBSD ports tree was security/wazuh-agent in
September 2021. In July 2022, I took maintainership of this port and I
started porting other Wazuh components.

Currently, all Wazuh components are part of the FreeBSD ports tree. It
includes security/wazuh-manager, security/wazuh-agent,
security/wazuh-server, security/wazuh-indexer and
security/wazuh-dashboard ports.

On FreeBSD, security/wazuh-manager and security/wazuh-agent are compiled
from Wazuh source code. security/wazuh-indexer is an adapted
textproc/opensearch used for storing agents data. security/wazuh-server
is a port for installing the security/wazuh-manager, sysutils/beats8
(filebeat), and sysutils/logstash8 components. It includes adapted
configuration files to work on FreeBSD. security/wazuh-dashboard uses an
adapted textproc/opensearch-dashboards and the wazuh-kibana-app plugin
generated from wazuh-kibana-app source code for FreeBSD.

The main goal of this work is enhancing visibility of FreeBSD as a
useful platform for information security or cybersecurity.

Additionally, you can test a Wazuh single-node infrastructure
(All-in-one) easily using https://github.com/alonsobsd/wazuh-makejail or
https://github.com/AppJail-makejails/wazuh from AppJail. AppJail is a
good tool for managing jail containers from the command line.

People interested in helping with the project are welcome.

Current version: 4.4.4

TODO

-   Add Wazuh cluster-mode infrastructure makejail (Work in progress)

-   Add FreeBSD to platforms officially supported by Wazuh Inc; see
    https://github.com/wazuh/wazuh-kibana-app/pull/5413

-   Add FreeBSD SCA Policy (Work in progress)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: July 5, 2023 by José Alonso Cárdenas Márquez

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
