[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE README

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/readme/article.sgml,v 1.1.2.17
2003/05/01 15:09:53 trhodes Exp $

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document gives a brief introduction to FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE. It
  includes some information on how to obtain FreeBSD, a listing of
  various ways to contact the FreeBSD Project, and pointers to some
  other sources of information.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This distribution is a release of FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE, the latest point
along the 4-STABLE branch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.1 About FreeBSD

FreeBSD is an operating system based on 4.4 BSD Lite for Intel, AMD,
Cyrix or NexGen ``x86'' based PC hardware and Compaq (formerly DEC)
Alpha computers. Versions for the IA64, PowerPC, and Sparc64
architectures are currently under development as well. FreeBSD works
with a wide variety of peripherals and configurations and can be used
for everything from software development to games to Internet Service
Provision.

This release of FreeBSD contains everything you need to run such a
system, including full source code for the kernel and all utilities in
the base distribution. With the source distribution installed, you can
literally recompile the entire system from scratch with one command,
making it ideal for students, researchers, or users who simply want to
see how it all works.

A large collection of third-party ported software (the ``Ports
Collection'') is also provided to make it easy to obtain and install all
your favorite traditional UNIX utilities for FreeBSD. Each ``port''
consists of a set of scripts to retrieve, configure, build, and install
a piece of software, with a single command. Over 9,200 ports, from
editors to programming languages to graphical applications, make FreeBSD
a powerful and comprehensive operating environment that extends far
beyond what's provided by many commercial versions of UNIX. Most ports
are also available as pre-compiled ``packages'', which can be quickly
installed from the installation program.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.2 Target Audience

This release of FreeBSD is suitable for all users. It has undergone a
period of testing and quality assurance checking to ensure the highest
reliability and dependability.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Obtaining FreeBSD

FreeBSD may be obtained in a variety of ways. This section focuses on
those ways that are primarily useful for obtaining a complete FreeBSD
distribution, rather than updating an existing installation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 CDROM and DVD

FreeBSD -RELEASE distributions may be ordered on CDROM or DVD from
several publishers. This is frequently the most convenient way to obtain
FreeBSD for new installations, as it provides a convenient way to
quickly reinstall the system if necessary. Some distributions include
some of the optional, precompiled ``packages'' from the FreeBSD Ports
Collection.

A list of the CDROM and DVD publishers known to the project are listed
in the ``Obtaining FreeBSD'' appendix to the Handbook.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 FTP

You can use FTP to retrieve FreeBSD and any or all of its optional
packages from ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/, which is the official FreeBSD
release site, or any of its ``mirrors''.

Lists of locations that mirror FreeBSD can be found in the FTP Sites
section of the Handbook, or on the http://mirrorlist.FreeBSD.org/ Web
pages. Finding a close (in networking terms) mirror from which to
download the distribution is highly recommended.

Additional mirror sites are always welcome. Contact
<freebsd-admin@FreeBSD.org> for more details on becoming an official
mirror site.

Mirrors generally contain the floppy disk images necessary to begin an
installation, as well as the distribution files needed for the install
process itself. Many mirrors also contain the ISO images necessary to
create a CDROM of a FreeBSD release.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Contacting the FreeBSD Project

3.1 Email and Mailing Lists

For any questions or general technical support issues, please send mail
to the FreeBSD general questions mailing list.

If you are tracking the -STABLE development efforts, you must join the
FreeBSD-STABLE mailing list, in order to keep abreast of recent
developments and changes that may affect the way you use and maintain
the system.

Being a largely-volunteer effort, the FreeBSD Project is always happy to
have extra hands willing to help--there are already far more desired
enhancements than there is time to implement them. To contact the
developers on technical matters, or with offers of help, please send
mail to the FreeBSD technical discussions mailing list.

Please note that these mailing lists can experience significant amounts
of traffic. If you have slow or expensive mail access, or are only
interested in keeping up with major FreeBSD events, you may find it
preferable to subscribe instead to the FreeBSD announcements mailing
list.

All of the mailing lists can be freely joined by anyone wishing to do
so. Visit FreeBSD Mailman Info Page. This will give you more information
on joining the various lists, accessing archives, etc. There are a
number of mailing lists targeted at special interest groups not
mentioned here; more information can be obtained either through
majordomo or the mailing lists section of the FreeBSD Web site.

  Important: Do not send email to the lists asking to be subscribed. Use
  the <majordomo@FreeBSD.org> address instead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2 Submitting Problem Reports

Suggestions, bug reports and contributions of code are always
valued--please do not hesitate to report any problems you may find. Bug
reports with attached fixes are of course even more welcome.

The preferred method to submit bug reports from a machine with Internet
mail connectivity is to use the send-pr(1) command or use the Web form
at http://www.FreeBSD.org/send-pr.html. ``Problem Reports'' (PRs)
submitted in this way will be filed and their progress tracked; the
FreeBSD developers will do their best to respond to all reported bugs as
soon as possible. A list of all active PRs is available on the FreeBSD
Web site; this list is useful to see what potential problems other users
have encountered.

Note that send-pr(1) itself is a shell script that should be easy to
move even onto a non-FreeBSD system. Using this interface is highly
preferred. If, for some reason, you are unable to use send-pr(1) to
submit a bug report, you can try to send it to the FreeBSD problem
reports mailing list.

For more information, ``Writing FreeBSD Problem Reports'', available on
the FreeBSD Web site, has a number of helpful hints on writing and
submitting effective problem reports.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Further Reading

There are many sources of information about FreeBSD; some are included
with this distribution, while others are available on-line or in print
versions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.1 Release Documentation

A number of other files provide more specific information about this
release distribution. These files are provided in various formats. Most
distributions will include both ASCII text (.TXT) and HTML (.HTM)
renditions. Some distributions may also include other formats such as
PostScript (.PS) or Portable Document Format (.PDF).

-   README.TXT: This file, which gives some general information about
    FreeBSD as well as some cursory notes about obtaining a
    distribution.

-   RELNOTES.TXT: The release notes, showing what's new and different in
    FreeBSD 4.9-RELEASE compared to the previous release (FreeBSD
    4.8-RELEASE).

-   HARDWARE.TXT: The hardware compatability list, showing devices with
    which FreeBSD has been tested and is known to work.

-   INSTALL.TXT: Installation instructions for installing FreeBSD from
    its distribution media.

-   ERRATA.TXT: Release errata. Late-breaking, post-release information
    can be found in this file, which is principally applicable to
    releases (as opposed to snapshots). It is important to consult this
    file before installing a release of FreeBSD, as it contains the
    latest information on problems which have been found and fixed since
    the release was created.

  Note: Several of these documents (in particular, RELNOTES.TXT,
  HARDWARE.TXT, and INSTALL.TXT) contain information that is specific to
  a particular hardware architecture. For example, the alpha release
  notes contain information not applicable to the i386, and vice versa.
  The architecture for which each document applies will be listed in
  that document's title.

These documents are generally available via the Documentation menu
during installation. Once the system is installed, you can revisit this
menu by running the sysinstall(8) utility.

  Note: It is extremely important to read the errata for any given
  release before installing it, to learn about any ``late-breaking
  news'' or post-release problems. The errata file accompanying each
  release (most likely right next to this file) is already out of date
  by definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and
  should be consulted as the ``current errata'' for this release. These
  other copies of the errata are located at
  http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/ (as well as any sites which keep
  up-to-date mirrors of this location).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.2 Manual Pages

As with almost all UNIX-like operating systems, FreeBSD comes with a set
of on-line manual pages, accessed through the man(1) command or through
the hypertext manual pages gateway on the FreeBSD Web site. In general,
the manual pages provide information on the different commands and APIs
available to the FreeBSD user.

In some cases, manual pages are written to give information on
particular topics. Notable examples of such manual pages are tuning(7)
(a guide to performance tuning), security(7) (an introduction to FreeBSD
security), and style(9) (a style guide to kernel coding).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.3 Books and Articles

Two highly-useful collections of FreeBSD-related information, maintained
by the FreeBSD Project, are the FreeBSD Handbook and FreeBSD FAQ
(Frequently Asked Questions document). On-line versions of the Handbook
and FAQ are always available from the FreeBSD Documentation page or its
mirrors. If you install the doc distribution set, you can use a Web
browser to read the Handbook and FAQ locally.

A number of on-line books and articles, also maintained by the FreeBSD
Project, cover more-specialized, FreeBSD-related topics. This material
spans a wide range of topics, from effective use of the mailing lists,
to dual-booting FreeBSD with other operating systems, to guidelines for
new committers. Like the Handbook and FAQ, these documents are available
from the FreeBSD Documentation Page or in the doc distribution set.

A listing of other books and documents about FreeBSD can be found in the
bibliography of the FreeBSD Handbook. Because of FreeBSD's strong UNIX
heritage, many other articles and books written for UNIX systems are
applicable as well, some of which are also listed in the bibliography.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

5 Acknowledgments

FreeBSD represents the cumulative work of many hundreds, if not
thousands, of individuals from around the world who have worked
countless hours to bring about this release. For a complete list of
FreeBSD developers and contributors, please see ``Contributors to
FreeBSD'' on the FreeBSD Web site or any of its mirrors.

Special thanks also go to the many thousands of FreeBSD users and
testers all over the world, without whom this release simply would not
have been possible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
