[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/i386 4.5-RELEASE Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/common/new.sgml,v
1.22.2.191.2.1 2002/01/25 20:58:19 bmah Exp $

The release notes for FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made in the FreeBSD base system since 4.4-RELEASE. Both changes
for kernel and userland are listed, as well as applicable security
advisories for the base system that were issued since the last release.
Some brief remarks on upgrading are also presented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 What's New

2.1 Kernel Changes

2.1.1 Processor/Motherboard Support

2.1.2 Boot Loaders

2.1.3 Network Interface Support

2.1.4 Network Protocols

2.1.5 Disks and Storage

2.1.6 Filesystems

2.1.7 PCCARD Support

2.1.8 Multimedia Support

2.1.9 Contributed Software

2.2 Security-Related Changes

2.3 Userland Changes

2.3.1 Contributed Software

2.3.2 Ports/Packages Collection

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE on the
IA-32 hardware platform. It describes new features of FreeBSD that have
been added (or changed) since 4.4-RELEASE. It also provides some notes
on upgrading from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/releases/ or any of
its mirrors. More information on obtaining this (or other) release
distributions of FreeBSD can be found in the ``Obtaining FreeBSD''
appendix in the FreeBSD Handbook.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 What's New

This section describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 4.4-RELEASE. Typical release note items document new
drivers or hardware support, new commands or options, major bugfixes, or
contributed software upgrades. Security advisories for the base system
that were issued after 4.4-RELEASE are also listed.

Many additional changes were made to FreeBSD that are not listed here
for lack of space. For example, documentation was corrected and
improved, minor bugs were fixed, insecure coding practices were audited
and corrected, and source code was cleaned up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Kernel Changes

The amdpm(4) driver has been added to provide access to the system
monitoring functions of the AMD 756 chip set.

The kern.maxvnodes limit now properly limits the number of vnodes in
use. Previously only vnodes with no cached pages could be freed; this
could allow the number of vnodes to grow without limit on large-memory
machines accessing many small files. A vnlru kernel thread helps to
flush and reuse vnodes.

A new KVA_SPACE kernel option can be used to reconfigure the size of the
kernel virtual address space.

Linux emulation now supports the kernel functionality required by the
emulators/linux_base-7 (RedHat 7.X emulation) port.

The kernel configuration parameters MAXTSIZ, DFLDSIZ, MAXDSIZ, DFLSSIZ,
MAXSSIZ, and SGROWSIZ are all loader tunables (kern.maxtsiz,
kern.maxdfldsiz, etc.).

Specifying a value of 0 for the maxusers kernel configuration parameter
will now cause an appropriate value to be calculated at boot-time
(between 32 and 384, depending on the amount of memory present). This
value is now the default for all GENERIC kernels.

The pmc driver, which supports the power management controller of the
NEC PC-98NOTE, has been added.

The load addresses of kernels are now exported to the symbol table and
various hard-coded constants have been removed so that utilities such as
ps(1) can work with kernels compiled at different addresses.

Coredumps of large processes (or of a large number of processes) no
longer lock up the machine for long periods of time.

The number of memory pages allocated for the per-process kernel state
has been increased from 2 to 3, to reduce the likelihood of kernel stack
overflow (and subsequent corruption of per-process data structures).

The system load average computation now adds some jitter to the timing
of samples, in order to avoid synchronization with processes that run
periodically.

If a debugging kernel with modules is being built (i.e. using
makeoptions DEBUG=-g), the modules will now be built with debugging
support as well, for completeness. A side effect of this change is that
modules built and installed with debugging kernels will now occupy more
space on disk than they did previously.

The kernel on the installation CDs is now separated from the mfsroot
image. This provides more flexibility when building custom FreeBSD
distributions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.1 Processor/Motherboard Support

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.2 Boot Loaders

A new cdboot bootstrap utility for CDROMs provides better compatability
with some BIOS implementations that do not completely implement the El
Torito bootable CDROM standard. This boot loader supports ``no
emulation'' mode booting, thus eliminating the need for an emulated
floppy disk image on a bootable CDROM. This in turn permits the use of a
full kernel when installing from CD on machines that support CD booting
(instead of the stripped-down kernel used on floppies).

  Note: While this functionality is not used in the FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE
  ISO images, it may be used for future releases. In the meantime, this
  feature is available for users constructing custom distributions.

The loader(8) now has optional support (enabled at compile-time, off by
default) for loading bzip2-compressed kernels and modules.

The FreeBSD boot loader is now capable of booting from filesystems with
16K disk blocks (the old limit was 8K).

The FreeBSD boot loader now supports a -p flag to force the kernel to
pause after each line of output during the probing phase.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.3 Network Interface Support

The an(4) driver now supports ``monitor'' mode, settable via the -M
option to ancontrol(8).

The bge(4) driver has been added to support the Broadcom BCM570x family
of Gigabit Ethernet controllers, including the 3Com 3c996-T, the
SysKonnect SK-9D21 and SK-9D41, and the built-in Gigabit Ethernet NICs
on Dell PowerEdge 2550 servers. Output TCP/IP checksum offload, jumbo
frames and VLAN tag insertion/stripping are supported, as well as
interrupt moderation.

The dc(4) driver now supports NICs based on the Conexant LANfinity
RS7112 chip.

The de(4) driver now performs round-robin arbitration between the
transmit and receive units of the 21143, instead of giving priority to
the receive unit. This gives a 10-15% performance improvement in the
forwarding rate under heavy load.

The dgm driver has been updated from FreeBSD -CURRENT.

The em(4) driver has been added to support NICs based on the Intel
82542, 82543, and 82544 Gigabit Ethernet controller chips. The driver
supports transmit/receive checksum offload and jumbo frames on 82543 and
82544-based adapters.

The faith(4) device is now loadable, unloadable, and clonable.

The fxp(4) driver now supports Intel's loadable microcode to implement
receive-side interrupt coalescing and packet bundling, on NICs that
support these features. This support can be activated by the use of the
link0 option to ifconfig(8).

The gx(4) driver has been added to support NICs based on the Intel 82542
and 82543 Gigabit Ethernet controller chips. Both fiber and copper
variants of the cards are supported. Both boards support VLAN
tagging/insertion, and the 82543 additionally supports TCP/IP checksum
offload.

The sbni driver, for supporting the Granch SBNI12 series of ISA and PCI
point-to-point communications interfaces, has been added. The
sysutil/sbniconfig port in the FreeBSD Ports Collection can be used for
configuring these devices.

The sis(4) driver now supports the SiS 900-style on-board Ethernet
controllers in the SiS 635 and 735 motherboard chipsets.

The sis(4) driver now supports VLANs.

vlan(4) devices are now loadable, unloadable, and clonable.

The wx(4) driver is now deprecated; it is now officially unmaintained.
Users with Intel Pro/1000 Gigabit Ethernet interfaces should use either
the em(4) driver or the gx(4) driver. (The em(4) driver is supported by
Intel, but only works on the i386 architecture. The gx(4) driver was
developed by the FreeBSD Project, and is multi-platform.)

The xl(4) driver now supports send- and receive-side TCP/IP checksum
offloading for NICs implementing this feature, such as the 3C905B,
3C905C, and 3C980C.

A bug in the xl(4) driver, related to statistics overflow interrupt
handling, was causing slowdowns at medium to high packet rates; this has
been fixed.

The per-interface ifnet structure now has the ability to indicate a set
of capabilities supported by a network interface, and which ones are
enabled. ifconfig(8) has support for querying these capabilities.

Performance with hosts having a large number of IP aliases has been
improved, by replacing the per-interface if_inaddr linear list with a
hash table.

The packet-forwarding performance of certain network drivers
(specifically dc(4) and sis(4)) has been enhanced by the elimination of
unnecessary buffer copies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.4 Network Protocols

The read timeout feature of bpf(4) now works more correctly with
select(2)/ poll(2), and therefore with pthreads.

bridge(4) and dummynet(4) have received some enhancements and bug fixes,
and are now loadable modules.

A bug in the TCP NewReno implementation, which could cause degraded
throughput under certain circumstances, has been fixed.

TCP's default buffer sizes, controlled by the net.inet.tcp.sendspace and
net.inet.tcp.recvspace sysctl variables, have been increased to 32K and
64K respectively. Previously, the default for both buffer sizes was 16K.
To try to avoid increasing congestion, the default value for
net.inet.tcp.local_slowstart_flightsize has been changed from infinity
to 4.

  Note: On busy hosts, the new larger buffer sizes may require manually
  increasing the NMBCLUSTERS parameter, either in the kernel
  configuration file or via the kern.ipc.nmbclusters loader tunable.
  netstat -mb can be used to monitor the state of mbuf clusters.

A bug in the TCP implementation, which could cause connections to stall
if a sender saw a zero-sized window, has been corrected.

The TCP implementation in FreeBSD now implements a cache of outstanding,
received SYN segments. Incoming SYN segments now cause entries to be
placed in the cache until the TCP three-way handshake is complete, at
which point, memory is allocated for the connection as usual. In
addition, all TCP Initial Sequence Numbers (ISNs) are used as cookies,
allowing entries in the cache to be dropped, but still have their
corresponding ACKs accepted later. The combination of the so-called
``syncache'' and ``syncookies'' features makes a host much more
resistant to TCP-based Denial of Service attacks. Work on this feature
was sponsored by DARPA and NAI Labs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.5 Disks and Storage

The aac(4) driver has been updated to include proper handling of
commands initiated by the adapter, addition/removal of disk devices,
crashdump functionality, and ioctl(2) commands necessary for the
management CLI. This driver is now fully qualified and sanctioned by
Adaptec.

The ata(4) driver now supports a wider variety of chipsets, as listed in
the Hardware Notes.

The ata(4) driver now has support for 48-bit addressing. Devices larger
than 137GB are now supported.

The ata(4) driver now contains fixes for some data corruption problems
on systems using the VIA 82C686B Southbridge chip.

The ciss driver, for devices utilizing the Common Interface for SCSI-3
Support, has been added. This driver supports the Compaq SmartRAID 5*
family of RAID controllers (5300, 532, 5i).

The isp(4) driver now supports the Qlogic 2300 and 2312 Optical Fibre
Channel PCI cards.

The ncv, nsp, and stg SCSI drivers can now be built and loaded as
modules.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.6 Filesystems

The directory layout preference algorithm for FFS (dirprefs) has been
changed. Rather than scattering directory blocks across a disk, it
attempts to group related directory blocks together. Operations
traversing large directory hierarchies, such as the FreeBSD Ports tree,
have shown marked speedups. This change is transparent and automatic for
new directories.

The virtual memory subsystem now backs UFS directory memory requirements
by default (this behavior is controlled via the vfs.vmiodirenable sysctl
variable).

A bug that prevented the root filesystem from being mounted from a SCSI
CDROM has been fixed (ATAPI CDROMs were always supported).

The UFS_DIRHASH hash-based lookup optimization for large directories is
now enabled by default in the GENERIC kernel.

A number of bugs in the filesystem code, discovered through the use of
the fsx filesystem test tool, have been fixed. Under certain
circumstances (primarily related to use of NFS), these bugs could cause
data corruption or kernel panics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.7 PCCARD Support

Various features have been merged from the FreeBSD -CURRENT version of
the pcic(4) driver, including improved support for ToPIC-based laptops,
3.3V support for some controllers, and bugfixes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.8 Multimedia Support

The urio(4) driver, for the Diamond Rio series of MP3 players, has been
added. (For some reason, a manual page for this driver was committed to
FreeBSD 4.3-RELEASE.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.9 Contributed Software

IPFilter now supports IPv6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.9.1 isdn4bsd

isdnphone(8) now supports a -k option for sending messages via the
keypad facility to a PBX or exchange office.

The isic(4) driver now supports the Compaq Microcom 610 ISDN ISA PnP
card.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Security-Related Changes

Per-user ~/.login.conf files were disabled in FreeBSD 4.4-RELEASE to
avoid a security hole caused by a bug. The bug was fixed and this
feature has been re-enabled.

A security hole in OpenSSH, which could allow users to execute code with
arbitrary privileges if UseLogin yes was set, has been closed. Note that
the default value of this setting is UseLogin no. (See security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-01:63.)

The use of an insecure temporary directory by pkg_add(1) could permit a
local attacker to modify the contents of binary packages while they were
being installed. This hole has been closed. (See security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:01.)

A race condition in pw(8), which could expose the contents of
/etc/master.passwd, has been eliminated. (See security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:02.)

A bug in k5su(8) could have allowed a process that had given up
superuser privileges to regain them. This bug has been fixed. (See
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:07.)

A race condition in the exec(3) system call, which could result in local
users obtaining increased privileges, has been fixed. (See security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:08.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Userland Changes

arp(8) now prints the applicable interface name for each ARP entry.

A minimalized version of camcontrol(8) is now available on the
installation floppy. This allows it to rescan for devices that have been
connected after booting, or to show the devices attached to SCSI busses
(e. g. from within the ``emergency holographic shell''). As a
side-effect, this allows devices attached to aic(4)-based PCMCIA SCSI
adapters like the Adaptec APA-1460 to be used during installation.

cat(1) now has the ability to read from UNIX-domain sockets.

The compat4x compatability distribution now includes versions of
libcrypto.so.1 and libssl.so.1 that do not depend on the librsaUSA.so
and librsaINTL.so libraries. This change improves compatability with
binaries built for FreeBSD 4.1-RELEASE and older.

edquota(8) now takes a -f option to allow limiting the prototype quota
distribution (specified with -p) to a single filesystem.

find(1) can now take various units of time to be applied to the
-[acm]time primaries.

fmt(1) has been rewritten; the rewrite fixes a number of bugs compared
to its prior behavior.

ftpd(8) now supports -o and -O options to disable the RETR command; the
former for everybody, and the latter only for guest users. Coupled with
-A and appropriate file permissions, these can be used to create a
relatively safe anonymous FTP drop box for others to upload to.

The groups(1) and whoami(1) shell scripts are now unnecessary; their
functionality has been completely folded into id(1).

ipfw(8) will now avoid the display of dynamic firewall rules unless the
-d flag is passed to it. The -e option lists expired dynamic rules.

ipfw(8) has a new limit type of firewall rule, which limits the number
of sessions between address pairs.

keyinfo(1) is now a C program, rather than a Perl script.

libfetch has been synchronized to the version in FreeBSD -CURRENT; among
other features, it now has support for an authentication callback.

libstand now has support for filesystems containing bzip2-compressed
files.

Locale names have been renamed to improve compatibility with the names
used by X11R6, as well as a number of other UNIX versions. As an
example, the en_US.ISO_8859-1 locale name has been changed to
en_US.ISO8859-1. Entries in /etc/locale.alias, /etc/man.alias, and
/etc/nls.alias provide backward compatibility. The table below
summarizes the locale changes:

  FreeBSD 4.4-RELEASE   FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE
  --------------------- ---------------------
  ISO_*                 ISO*
  ru_SU*                ru_RU*
  DIS_*                 ISO*-15
  *.ASCII               *.US-ASCII

lpd(8) now has some support for o-type print-file actions in its control
files, which allows printing of PostScript files generated by MacOS
10.1.

natd(8) now supports a -log_ipfw_denied option to log packets that
cannot be re-injected because they are blocked by ipfw(8) rules.

netstat(1) now has a -z flag to reset statistics.

netstat(1) now has a -S flag to print addresses numerically but port
names symbolically.

The default number of cylinders per group in newfs(8) is now computed to
be the maximum allowable given the current filesystem parameters. It can
be overridden with the -c option. Formerly, the default was fixed at 16.
This change leads to better fsck(8) performance and reduced
fragmentation.

The default block and fragment sizes for new filesystems created by
newfs(8) are now 16384 and 2048 bytes, respectively (the old defaults
were 8192 and 1024 bytes). This change generally provides increased
performance, at the expense of some wasted disk space.

newsyslog(8) now has the ability to compress log files using bzip2(1).

nl(1), a line numbering filter program, has been added.

pciconf(8) now supports a -v option to display the vendor/device
information of configured devices, in conjunction with the -l option.
The default vendor/device database can be found at
/usr/share/misc/pci_vendors.

ping(8) now supports a -A option to beep when packets are lost.

route(8) is now more verbose when changing indirect routes, in the case
of a gateway route that is the same route as the one being modified.

route(8) now uses host/bits syntax instead of net/bits syntax, for
compatibility with netstat(1).

route(8) can now create ``proxy only'' published ARP entries.

The route(8) add command now supports the -ifp and -ifa modifiers.

send-pr(1) now takes a -a option to include a file into the Fix: section
of a problem report.

sh(1) now implements test as a built-in command for improved efficiency.

sysctl(8) now supports a -e option to separate variable names and values
by = rather than :. This feature is useful for producing output that can
be fed back to sysctl(8).

sysinstall(8) now has the ability to load KLDs as a part of the
installation.

When run from the installation media, sysinstall(8) will automatically
load any device drivers found in the /stand/modules directory of the
mfsroot floppy or filesystem image. Note that any drivers so loaded will
not appear in the kernel's boot messages; the sysinstall(8) debugging
screen will provide additional information.

sysinstall(8) now enables Soft Updates by default on all filesystems it
creates, except for the root filesystem.

sysinstall(8) has received updates for its ``auto'' partitioning mode
which provide more reasonable defaults for the sizes of partitions that
are created; auto-sized partitions can now also recover the space that
becomes available when other partitions are deleted.

syslogd(8) now has the ability to bind to a specific address (as opposed
to using every available one) via the -b option.

syslogd(8) now accepts a -c flag to disable repeated line compression.

Previously, vnconfig(8) was only capable of configuring 16 devices when
invoked with the -f (configuration file) option. This limit has been
removed.

wall(1) now supports a -g flag to write a message to all users of a
given group.

whois(1) supports a -c option to specify a country code to help direct
queries towards a particular whois server.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1 Contributed Software

The version of IPFilter provided with FreeBSD now includes the ipfs(8)
program, which allows state information created for NAT entries and
stateful rules to be saved to disk and restored after a reboot.
Boot-time configuration of these features is supported by rc.conf(5).

The NTP suite of programs has been updated to 4.1.0.

OpenSSH has been updated to version 2.9, which adds two new programs,
sftp(1) and ssh-keyscan(1). Among the various enhancements: Rekeying of
existing SSH sessions is now supported, ssh-agent(1) now supports
authentication forwarding for DSA keys, and an experimental SOCKS4 proxy
has been added to ssh(1).

  Note: Protocol 1,2 remains the default protocol setting in
  /etc/ssh/ssh_config. In FreeBSD -CURRENT, the default is Protocol 2,1.

The smmsp and mailnull users have been added to /etc/master.passwd. In
the absence of a confDEF_USER_ID setting, by default, sendmail will use
the mailnull user for extra security. Previously, if the mailnull user
did not exist, the daemon user was used. This change may generate some
permissions issues when mailing to files or to programs (such as
mail/majordomo). The previous behavior can be restored by adding the
following line to a system's *.mc configuration file:

        define(`confDEF_USER_ID', `daemon')

Version 1.4.3 of the smbfs userland utilities have been imported.
smbutil(1) and mount_smbfs(8) are now available in the base system,
without the need to install the net/smbfs port. Note that mount_smbfs(8)
will automatically load the smbfs.ko module into the kernel, even if
LIBMCHAIN and LIBICONV were not compiled into the kernel.

tcsh has been updated to version 6.11.

The timezone database has been updated to the tzdata2001d release.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1.1 CVS

CVS has been updated to 1.11.1p1.

cvs(1) now supports a -T option to update a sandbox's CVS/Template file
from the repository.

cvs(1) diff now supports the -j option to perform differences against a
revision relative to a branch tag.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.2 Ports/Packages Collection

Due to delays in the certification process, native JDK support for
FreeBSD will be released shortly after 4.5-RELEASE. An announcement will
be made on the FreeBSD Web site, as well as the FreeBSD announcements
mailing list <freebsd-announce@FreeBSD.org>, when the distribution is
available.

pkg_create(1) now supports a -b option to create a package file from a
locally-installed package.

pkg_delete(1) now supports a -r option for recursive package removal.

Version 4.2.0 of XFree86 was released just a few days before the
shipping date for FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE. As a result, the FreeBSD team did
not have time to test and evaluate the new version for inclusion in the
release. Therefore, FreeBSD 4.5-RELEASE includes the older 4.1.0 version
of the XFree86 package. Installing a newer version of XFree86 can be
done using an up-to-date (post-release) copy of the FreeBSD Ports
Collection; instructions for doing so can be found in the Using the
Ports Collection section of the FreeBSD Handbook.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

If you're upgrading from a previous release of FreeBSD, you generally
will have three options:

-   Using the binary upgrade option of sysinstall(8). This option is
    perhaps the quickest, although it presumes that your installation of
    FreeBSD uses no special compilation options.

-   Performing a complete reinstall of FreeBSD. Technically, this is not
    an upgrading method, and in any case is usually less convenient than
    a binary upgrade, in that it requires you to manually backup and
    restore the contents of /etc. However, it may be useful in cases
    where you want (or need) to change the partitioning of your disks.

-   From source code in /usr/src. This route is more flexible, but
    requires more disk space, time, and more technical expertise.
    Upgrading from very old versions of FreeBSD may be problematic; in
    cases like this, it is usually more effective to perform a binary
    upgrade or a complete reinstall.

Please read the INSTALL.TXT file for more information, preferably before
beginning an upgrade. If you are upgrading from source, please be sure
to read /usr/src/UPDATING as well.

Finally, if you want to use one of various means to track the -STABLE or
-CURRENT branches of FreeBSD, please be sure to consult the ``-CURRENT
vs. -STABLE'' section of the FreeBSD Handbook.

  Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should, of course, only be attempted
  after backing up all data and configuration files.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/releases/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
