[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

OpenSearch on FreeBSD

Links:
OpenSearch website URL: https://opensearch.org/
OpenSearch Community (unofficial) on Discord URL:
link:https://discord.gg/NmtQGAWY

Contact: OpenSearch Team <opensearch@FreeBSD.org>

OpenSearch is a community-driven, open-source search and analytics suite
derived from Apache 2.0 licensed Elasticsearch 7.10.2 & Kibana 7.10.2.
It consists of a search engine daemon, OpenSearch, and a visualization
and user interface, OpenSearch Dashboards. OpenSearch enables people to
easily ingest, secure, search, aggregate, view, and analyze data. These
capabilities are popular for use cases such as application search, log
analytics, and more. With OpenSearch people benefit from having an
open-source product they can use, modify, extend, monetize, and resell
how they want.

After the release of OpenSearch 1.0.0, a FreeBSD OpenSearch team was
created to coordinate the efforts for porting it to FreeBSD. Because
ElasticSearch 7 and Kibana 7 were already in the ports tree, we could
rely on these ports to get started quickly (kudos to the elastic@ team)
and could focus on the parts that already changed between the previous
codebase and the fork. The ports have been committed to the FreeBSD
ports tree as textproc/opensearch and textproc/opensearch-dashboards,
and currently provide the latest 1.0.1 version of OpenSearch.

Contributing

The ports have been thoroughly tested in our testing environments and on
some production workloads, but we are actively looking for feedback from
users. Feel free to send us an email to report successes or failures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: November 15, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
