[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

More wireless updates

Links:
Bjoern’s Wireless Work In Progress landing page URL:
https://people.freebsd.org/~bz/wireless/
Realtek rtw88 status FreeBSD wiki page URL:
https://wiki.freebsd.org/WiFi/Rtw88
Realtek rtw89 status FreeBSD wiki page URL:
https://wiki.freebsd.org/WiFi/Rtw89
MediaTek mt76 status FreeBSD wiki page URL:
https://wiki.freebsd.org/WiFi/Mt76
QCA ath11k status FreeBSD wiki page URL:
https://wiki.freebsd.org/WiFi/Ath11k

Contact: Bjoern A. Zeeb <bz@FreeBSD.org>

Currently development is mostly driven by Intel’s iwlwifi driver again
(see other report). As the saying goes ''each one helps the other'' so
has work on Realtek’s rtw89 driver helped find a bug in LinuxKPI
bothering iwlwifi users. For this status report the topic is mostly more
drivers, which do need more LinuxKPI support.

Various work in progress:

-   Realtek’s rtw88 PCI is in-tree as-is and after a fruitful discussion
    with Hans Petter Selasky at EuroBSDCon work on LinuxKPI USB support
    for the rtw88 USB WiFi dongles will continue.

-   Realtek’s rtw89 driver was committed to main but is not connected to
    the build yet. Scanning already works but packets are not yet
    passing. Having the driver in-tree already eased testing for users
    having that chipset in order to identify more unimplemented LinuxKPI
    bits (some of which will help the other drivers as well) and reduced
    work for me.

-   The next drivers to probably hit the tree will be based on
    MediaTek’s mt76 driver (for 7921 and 7915) which I have compiling
    and started testing.

-   Based on requests I am also working on ath11k to support STA mode
    given some vendors seem to ship Laptops with those chips.

While some of this clearly benefits from work sponsored by The FreeBSD
Foundation for iwlwifi and newer standard support, a lot of this is just
free-time work. If you are interested in any of these drivers I would
greatly appreciate if some more hands would help with one or the other.
This could be regularly testing updates to main, writing documentation
and updating wiki pages, tracking PRs, trying out patches, helping with
work on individual LinuxKPI bits with or without 802.11 work, or simply
debugging problems with individual drivers and/or chipsets. If you are
interested in helping with any one of the above, please drop me an
email.

For the latest state of the development, please follow the
freebsd-wireless mailing list and check the wiki pages (as soon as they
exist).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: October 20, 2022 by Maxim Konovalov

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
