[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

FreeBSD as a Tier 1 cloud-init Platform

Links:
cloud-init Website URL: https://cloud-init.io/
cloud-init Documentation URL:
https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
cloud-init ongoing refactorization URL:
https://github.com/canonical/cloud-init/blob/main/WIP-ONGOING-REFACTORIZATION.rst

Contact: Mina Galić <me+FreeBSD@igalic.co>

cloud-init is the standard way of provisioning servers in the cloud.
Unfortunately, cloud-init support for operating systems other than Linux
is rather poor, and the lack of cloud-init support on FreeBSD is a
hindrance to cloud providers who want to offer FreeBSD as a Tier 1
platform. To remedy the situation, this project aims to bring FreeBSD
cloud-init support on par with Linux support. The broader plan is to
lift support across all BSDs.

The first milestone has been delivered. Along with many bug fixes, we
now have merged an ifconfig(8) parser, which allows us to retrieve all
the information of all network devices, similarly to how on Linux this
is done by parsing the contents of /sys/class/net/<dev>/. In the coming
weeks, this project will align itself with the Azure developers to do
some crucial refactoring. This will move our new parser further into
cloud-init’s main execution paths.

People interested in helping with the project can help with testing new
features and fixes through net/cloud-init-devel, which will be updated
whenever we make significant commits. Further, people with access to,
and experience with, OpenBSD and NetBSD are also highly welcome to help.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: January 26, 2023 by Maxim Konovalov

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
