[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Experimental installer

Links:
Installer repository URL: https://github.com/yangzhong-freebsd/lua-httpd
Live ISO containing installer URL:
https://github.com/yangzhong-freebsd/ISO

Contact: Yang Zhong <yzhong@freebsdfoundation.org>

bsdinstall is FreeBSD’s current installer. It is a terminal application
with an unwieldy interface, and it asks some very obscure questions that
are hard to understand for ordinary users. So, the purpose of this
project is to create a graphical installer for FreeBSD that has a more
streamlined interface, and to improve other aspects of the FreeBSD
installation process.

The experimental installer uses a web front-end: a web server runs
locally from the installation media, and the user configures their
install by filling out web forms on a browser also running on the
installation media. A Web interface is flexible and accessible, so it
suits an installer well. This interface can also support remote
installs, where the server runs on the target and the install is
configured through some other machine, though I have not done much work
here.

The installer also aims to have a modular design, where the user
configuration options are written to an installation config file, that
is then used for the actual installation. While bsdinstall already
supports scripted installations, its config file format is very
free-form. A more rigid config file design would make it easier to write
other installation front-ends in the future.

The installer is currently a rough proof-of-concept, but it can handle a
basic installation with limited configuration. Help with testing would
be appreciated; you can try the installer by downloading one of the
releases in the ISO repository. Also, please email me with any thoughts
on the design of the installer, or on useful features it should have.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: July 24, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
