[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 9.0-RELEASE Installation Instructions

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2012 The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: stable/9/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/installation/article.sgml
230001 2012-01-12 03:52:53Z hrs $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

SPARC, SPARC64, SPARCengine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. SPARC
International, Inc owns all of the SPARC trademarks and under licensing
agreements allows the proper use of these trademarks by its members.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “®” symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This article gives some brief instructions on installing FreeBSD
  9.0-RELEASE and upgrading the systems running earlier releases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Installing FreeBSD

The “Installing FreeBSD” chapter of the FreeBSD Handbook provides more
in-depth information about the installation program itself, including a
guided walk-through with screenshots.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Upgrading FreeBSD

If you are upgrading from a previous release of FreeBSD, please read
upgrading section in the Release Notes for notable incompatibilities
carefully.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Upgrading from Source

The procedure for doing a source code based update is described in
http://www.FreeBSD.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/synching.html
and
http://www.FreeBSD.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook//makeworld.html.

For SVN use the releng/9.0 branch which will be where any upcoming
Security Advisories or Errata Notices will be applied. The branch tag to
use for updating the source is RELENG_9_0 for CVS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Upgrading Using “FreeBSD Update”

The freebsd-update(8) utility supports binary upgrades of i386 and amd64
systems running earlier FreeBSD releases. Systems running
7.[34]-RELEASE, 8.[12]-RELEASE, 9.0-BETA[123], or 9.0-RC[123] can
upgrade as follows:

First, ensure that your current system is up to date; a change was
recently made to freebsd-update(8) (Errata Notice
FreeBSD-EN-12:01.freebsd-update) which is needed in order to upgrade to
FreeBSD 9.0-RELEASE.

    # freebsd-update fetch
    # freebsd-update install

Now the freebsd-update(8) utility can fetch bits belonging to
9.0-RELEASE. During this process freebsd-update(8) will ask for help in
merging configuration files.

    # freebsd-update upgrade -r 9.0-RELEASE

Due to changes in the way that FreeBSD is packaged on the release media,
two complications may arise in this process if upgrading from FreeBSD
7.x or 8.x:

1.  The FreeBSD, which previously could appear in either /boot/kernel or
    /boot/GENERIC, now only appears as /boot/kernel. As a result, any
    kernel appearing in /boot/GENERIC will be deleted. Please carefully
    read the output printed by freebsd-update(8) and confirm that an
    updated kernel will be placed into /boot/kernel before proceeding
    beyond this point.

2.  The FreeBSD source tree in /usr/src (if present) will be deleted.
    (Normally the freebsd-update(8) utility will update a source tree,
    but in this case the changes in release packaging result in the
    freebsd-update(8) utility not recognizing that the source tree from
    the old release and the source tree from the new release correspond
    to the same part of FreeBSD.)

    # freebsd-update install

The system must now be rebooted with the newly installed kernel before
the non-kernel components are updated.

    # shutdown -r now

After rebooting, freebsd-update(8) needs to be run again to install the
new userland components:

    # freebsd-update install

At this point, users of systems being upgraded from FreeBSD 8.2-RELEASE
or earlier will be prompted by freebsd-update(8) to rebuild all
third-party applications (e.g., ports installed from the ports tree) due
to updates in system libraries.

After updating installed third-party applications (and again, only if
freebsd-update(8) printed a message indicating that this was necessary),
run freebsd-update(8) again so that it can delete the old (no longer
used) system libraries:

    # freebsd-update install

Finally, reboot into 9.0-RELEASE

    # shutdown -r now

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 9.0-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
