[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

-   RSS 2.0 Feed

FreeBSD 5.0 Press Release

FreeBSD Project announces FreeBSD 5.0

Berkeley, CA - January 20, 2003 - The FreeBSD Project The FreeBSD
Project announced today the availability of FreeBSD 5.0 after almost
three years of continuous development. The latest version of the
project’s powerful open source operating system includes several ground
breaking features:

-   Multiprocessor support has been extended and enhanced. We support
    SMP on all platforms, and have the infrastructure in place for
    extensive performance improvements.

-   Background filesystem checks offer quicker start up in disaster
    situations.

-   File system snapshots permit administrators to duplicate file
    systems in real time.

-   Experimental support for Mandatory Access Controls (MAC) provides an
    extensible and flexible means for administrators to define system
    security policies.

-   Kernel Schedulable Entities implement a high-performance
    many-to-many multiprocessor threading model.

-   Expanded hardware support now includes hardware cryptographic
    acceleration, ACPI, Bluetooth, and FireWire.

The release also includes new, reimplemented, and incremental
improvements in areas where FreeBSD already dominates, such as network
performance, stability, and reliability.

"This release represents our largest engineering success to date.", says
Murray Stokely, Vice President of Engineering at FreeBSD Mall Inc and
member of the FreeBSD Release Engineering Team. " The new technologies
present in FreeBSD 5.X will provide our customers with exciting new
functionality without sacrificing our legendary reliability."

About the FreeBSD Project

The FreeBSD Project provides a free UNIX-like operating system for the
Intel-compatible, Alpha, and Sparc platforms, based on the
industry-standard Berkeley Software Distribution. The FreeBSD Project
includes several thousand developers from dozens of countries around the
world, who funnel their work through a team of several hundred
committers. FreeBSD is available for free on the Internet, and as a
shrink-wrap product through many different retail vendors, listed at
vendors. For more information, please visit FreeBSD on the Web at
www.FreeBSD.org.

Press Contact

press@FreeBSD.org, or phone 1-925-674-0783

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: January 26, 2021 by Sergio Carlavilla Delgado

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
