[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 7.2-RELEASE Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009
The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: releng/7.2/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/article.sgml
191705 2009-04-30 21:20:09Z hrs $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

IBM, AIX, EtherJet, Netfinity, OS/2, PowerPC, PS/2, S/390, and ThinkPad
are trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in the
United States, other countries, or both.

IEEE, POSIX, and 802 are registered trademarks of Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. in the United States.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Microsoft, IntelliMouse, MS-DOS, Outlook, Windows, Windows Media and
Windows NT are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft
Corporation in the United States and/or other countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “®” symbol.

The release notes for FreeBSD 7.2-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system on the 7.2-STABLE development
line. This document lists applicable security advisories that were
issued since the last release, as well as significant changes to the
FreeBSD kernel and userland. Some brief remarks on upgrading are also
presented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 What's New

2.1 Security Advisories

2.2 Kernel Changes

2.2.1 Boot Loader Changes

2.2.2 Hardware Support

2.2.3 Network Protocols

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

2.2.5 File Systems

2.3 Userland Changes

2.4 Contributed Software

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 7.2-RELEASE. It
describes recently added, changed, or deleted features of FreeBSD. It
also provides some notes on upgrading from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 7.2-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/ or any of its mirrors. More
information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the “Obtaining FreeBSD” appendix to the FreeBSD
Handbook.

All users are encouraged to consult the release errata before installing
FreeBSD. The errata document is updated with “late-breaking” information
discovered late in the release cycle or after the release. Typically, it
contains information on known bugs, security advisories, and corrections
to documentation. An up-to-date copy of the errata for FreeBSD
7.2-RELEASE can be found on the FreeBSD Web site.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 What's New

This section describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 7.1-RELEASE.

Typical release note items document recent security advisories issued
after 7.1-RELEASE, new drivers or hardware support, new commands or
options, major bug fixes, or contributed software upgrades. They may
also list changes to major ports/packages or release engineering
practices. Clearly the release notes cannot list every single change
made to FreeBSD between releases; this document focuses primarily on
security advisories, user-visible changes, and major architectural
improvements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Security Advisories

Problems described in the following security advisories have been fixed.
For more information, consult the individual advisories available from
http://security.FreeBSD.org/.

  Advisory             Date               Topic
  -------------------- ------------------ -------------------------------------------------------
  SA-09:01.lukemftpd   07 January 2009    Cross-site request forgery in lukemftpd(8)
  SA-09:02.openssl     07 January 2009    OpenSSL incorrectly checks for malformed signatures
  SA-09:03.ntpd        13 January 2009    ntpd cryptographic signature bypass
  SA-09:04.bind        13 January 2009    BIND DNSSEC incorrect checks for malformed signatures
  SA-09:05.telnetd     16 February 2009   telnetd code execution vulnerability
  SA-09:06.ktimer      23 March 2009      Local privilege escalation
  SA-09:07.libc        04 April 2009      Information leak in db(3)
  SA-09:08.openssl     22 April 2009      Remotely exploitable crash in OpenSSL

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Kernel Changes

The ddb(8) kernel debugger now supports a show mount subcommand.

The FreeBSD DTrace subsystem now supports a probe for process execution.

[amd64] The FreeBSD kernel virtual address space has been increased to
6GB. This allows subsystems to use larger virtual memory space than
before. For example, zfs(8) adaptive replacement cache (ARC) requires
large kernel memory space to cache file system data, so it benefits from
the increased address space. Note that the ceiling on the kernel map
size is now 60% of the size rather than an absolute quantity.

The jail(8) subsystem has been updated. Changes include:

-   Multiple addresses of both IPv4 and IPv6 per jail has been
    supported. It is even possible to have jails without an IP address
    at all, which basically gives one a chrooted environment with
    restricted process view and no networking.

-   SCTP (sctp(4)) with IPv6 in jails has been implemented.

-   Specific CPU binding by using cpuset(1) has been implemented. Note
    that the current implementation allows the superuser inside of the
    jail to change the CPU bindings specified. This behavior will be
    fixed in the next release.

-   A jail(8) can start with a specific route FIB now.

-   A show jails subcommand in ddb(8) has been added.

-   Compatibility support which permits 32-bit jail binaries to be used
    on 64-bit systems to manage jails has been added.

-   Note that both version numbers of jail and prison in the jail(8)
    have been updated for the new features.

The kld(4) now supports installing 32-bit system calls to the FreeBSD
system call translation layer from kernel modules.

The ktr(4) now supports a new KTR tracepoint in the KTR_CALLOUT class to
note when a callout routine finishes executing.

Types of variables used to track the amount of allocated System V shared
memory have been changed from int to size_t. This makes it possible to
use more than 2 GB of memory for shared memory segments on 64-bit
architectures. Please note the new BUGS section in shmctl(2) and
/usr/src/UPDATING for limitations of this temporary solution.

The sysctl(3) leaf nodes have a flag to tag themselves as MPSAFE now.

The FreeBSD 32-bit system call translation layer now supports installing
32-bit system calls for VFS_AIO.

[amd64, i386] The FreeBSD virtual memory subsystem now supports fully
transparent use of superpages for application memory; application memory
pages are dynamically promoted to or demoted from superpages without any
modification to application code. This change offers the benefit of
large page sizes such as improved virtual memory efficiency and reduced
TLB (translation lookaside buffer) misses without downsides like
application changes and virtual memory inflexibility. This is disabled
by default and can be enabled by setting a loader tunable
vm.pmap.pg_ps_enabled to 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1 Boot Loader Changes

The boot(8) now supports 4-byte volume ID that certain versions of
Windows® put into the MBR and invoking PXE by pressing F6 key on some
supported BIOSes.

[i386] The boot(8) BTX loader has been improved. This fixes several boot
issues on recent machines reported for 7.1-RELEASE and before.

The loader(8) is now able to obtain DHCP options from network boot via
kenv(2) variables.

A bug in the loader(8) has been fixed. Now the following line works as
expected:

    loader_conf_files="foo bar ${variable}"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2 Hardware Support

[sparc64] The FreeBSD now supports Ultra SPARC III (Cheetah) processor
family.

The acpi(4) subsystem now supports a sysctl(8) variable
debug.batt.batt_sleep_ms. On some laptops with smart batteries, enabling
battery monitoring software causes keystrokes from atkbd(4) to be lost.
This sysctl variable adds a delay in millisecond to the status checking
code as a workaround.

The acpi_asus(4) driver now supports Asus A8Sr notebooks.

[powerpc] Support for the AltiVec, a floating point and integer SIMD
instruction set has been added.

The cpuctl(4) driver, which provides a special device /dev/cpuctl as an
interface to the system CPU has been added. The cpuctl(4) functionality
includes the ability to retrieve CPUID information, read/write machine
specific registers (MSR), and perform CPU firmware updates.

The cpufreq(4) driver now supports an hw.est.msr_info loader tunable.
When this is set to 1, it attempts to build a simple list containing
just the high and low frequencies if it cannot obtain a frequency list
from either ACPI or the static tables. This is disabled by default.

[amd64, i386] CPU frequency change notifiers are now disabled when the
TSC is P-state invariant. Also, a new loader tunable
kern.timecounter.invariant_tsc has been added to force this behavior by
setting it to non-zero.

The atkbd(4) driver now disables the interrupt handler which is called
from the keyboard callback function when polled mode is enabled. This
fixes the problem of duplicated/missing characters at the mountroot
prompt on multi CPU systems while kbdmux(4) is enabled.

In the pci(4) subsystem INTx is now disabled when MSI/MSIX is enabled.
This change fixes interrupt storm related issues.

[sparc64] The schizo(4) driver for Schizo Fireplane/Safari to PCI 2.1
and Tomatillo JBus to PCI 2.2 bridges has been added.

The u3g(4) driver for USB based 3G cards and dongles including Vodafone
Mobile Connect Card 3G, Qualcomm CDMA MSM, Huawei E220, Novatel U740,
Sierra MC875U, and so on has been added. This provides support for the
multiple USB-to-serial interfaces exposed by many 3G USB/PC Card modems,
and the device is accessed through the ucom(4) driver which makes it
behave like a tty(4).

The sched_ule(4) scheduler now supports a loader tunable
machdep.hyperthreading_enabled as the sched_4bsd(4) does. Note that it
cannot be modified at run-time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.1 Multimedia Support

The agp(4) driver now supports Intel G4X series graphics chipsets.

The DRM, a kernel module named Direct Rendering Manager that gives
direct hardware access to DRI clients, has been updated. Support for
AMD/ATI r500, r600, r700, and IGP based chips, XGI V3XE/V5/V8, and Intel
i915 chipsets has been improved.

A new loader tunable hw.drm.msi has been added to control if DRM uses
MSI or not. This is set to 1 (enabled) by default.

The snd_au88x0(4) driver for Aureal Vortex 1/2/Advantage PCI has been
removed because this was broken for a long time.

The snd_hda(4) driver has been updated. This changes include support for
multiple codec per HDA bus, multiple functional groups per codec,
multiple audio devices per functional group, digital (SPDIF/HDMI) audio
input/output, suspend/resume, and part of multichannel audio.

Note that due to added HDMI audio and logical audio devices support, the
updated driver often provides several PCM devices. This means that in
some cases the system default audio device no longer corresponds to the
users's habitual audio connectors. In such cases the default device can
be specified in audio applications' setup or defined globally via
hw.snd.default_unit sysctl, as described in the sound(4) manual page.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.2 Network Interface Support

The ae(4) driver now supports WoL (Wake on LAN).

[amd64, i386] The ale(4) driver is now included in the GENERIC kernel.

The ath_hal(4), Atheros Hardware Access Layer, has been updated to the
open source version.

The axe(4) driver has been improved in performance by eliminating extra
context switches and now supports Apple USB Ethernet adapter.

The bce(4) driver's firmware has been updated to the latest version
(4.6.X).

The ciphy(4) driver now supports Vitesse VSC8211 PHY.

The cxgb(4) driver has been updated to firmware revision 4.7 and now
supports hardware MAC statistics.

The fxp(4) driver has been improved. Changes include:

-   The checksum offload feature can be controlled by ifconfig(8) now.

-   Rx checksum offload support for 82559 or later controllers has been
    added.

-   TSO (TCP Segmentation Offload) support for 82550 and 82551
    controllers has been added.

-   WoL (Wake on LAN) support for 82550, 82551, 82558, and 82559-based
    controllers has been added. Note that ICH based controllers are
    treated as 82559, and 82557, earlier revisions of 82558, and 82559ER
    have no WoL capability.

-   VLAN hardware tag insertion/stripping support and Tx/Rx checksum
    offload for VLAN frames support have been added. Note that the VLAN
    hardware assistance is available only on 82550 or 82551-based
    controllers.

A bug in the igb(4) driver, which prevents the loader tunable
hw.igb.ave_latency from working, has been fixed.

The ixgbe(4) driver has been updated to version 1.7.4.

The jme(4) driver now supports newer JMicron JMC250/JMC260 revisions.

The msk(4) driver has been improved. An issue which makes it hang up in
a certain condition has been fixed. Hardware MAC statistics support has
been added and users can get the information via sysctl variables named
dev.msk.N.stats.

The mxge(4) driver now supports some newer revisions and 10GBASE-LRM and
10GBASE-Twinax media types.

The nfe(4) driver now supports hardware MAC statistics.

The re(4) driver has been improved. It now detects the link status. A
new loader tunable hw.re.prefer_iomap has been added, to disable memory
register mapping. This tunable is 0 for all controllers except RTL8169SC
family.

The rl(4) driver has been improved. It now detects the link status and a
bug which prevents it from working on systems with more than 4GB memory
has been fixed.

A bug in sis(4) on VLAN tagged frame handling has been fixed.

The txp(4) driver now works on all supported architectures. Support has
been added for altq(4), WoL, checksum offload when VLAN enabled, and
link state change handling has been improved, and new sysctl variables
dev.txp.N.stats for MAC statistics have been added. New sysctl variables
dev.txp.N.process_limit has been added, to control how many received
frames should be served in Rx handler (set to 64 by default and valid
ranges are 16 to 128 in unit of frames). The firmware has been updated
to the latest version.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.3 Network Protocols

IPv4 source address selection for unbound sockets has been implemented
as follows:

1.  If we found a route, use the address corresponding to the outgoing
    interface.

2.  Otherwise we assume the foreign address is reachable on a directly
    connected network and try to find a corresponding interface to take
    the source address from.

3.  As a last resort use the default jail address.

This also changes the semantics of selecting the IP for processes within
a jail(8) as it now uses the same logic as outside the jail(8).

The TCP MD5 Signature Option (RFC 2385) for IPv6 has been implemented in
the same way it has been implemented for IPv4.

The ng_netflow(4) Netgraph node now includes support for generating
egress netflow instead or in addition to ingress. An
NGM_NETFLOW_SETCONFIG control message has been added to control the new
functionality.

The tap(4) Ethernet tunnel software network interface now supports a new
TAPGIFNAME character device ioctl. This is a convenient shortcut to
obtain the network interface name using a file descriptor to a character
device.

The tap(4) now supports SIOCSIFMTU ioctl to set a higher MTU than 1500
(ETHERMTU). This allows tap(4) devices to be added to the same bridge
(which requires all interface members to have the same MTU) with an
interface configured for jumbo frames.

The domains list for handling the list of supported domains in the
unix(4) (UNIX domain protocol family) subsystem is now MPSAFE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

The ata(4) driver now supports Marvell PATA M88SX6121.

The ata(4) driver now recognizes nForce MCP67 and MCP73 SATA controllers
as AHCI.

The ataraid(4) driver now includes preliminary support for DDF metadata
found on Adaptec HostRAID controllers. Note that spares and rebuilds are
not supported yet.

The cam(4) SCSI subsystem now supports a new sysctl variable
kern.cam.cd.retry_count. This controls the number of retries for the CD
media. When trying to read scratched or damaged CDs and DVDs, the
default mechanism is sub-optimal, and programs like ddrescue do much
better if you turn off the retries entirely since their algorithms do it
by themselves. This value is set to 4 (for a total of 5 attempts) by
default. Setting it to 0 turns off all retry attempts.

A bug in the ciss(4) driver which caused low “max device openings” count
and led to poor performance has been fixed.

The glabel(8) GEOM class now supports a new UFS-based label called ufsid
that can be used to reference UFS-carrying devices by the unique file
system ID. This file system ID is automatically generated and detected
when the glabel(8) GEOM class is enabled. An example of this new label
is: /dev/ufsid/48e69c8b5c8e1b43. The benefit of using GEOM labels in
general is to avoid problems of device renaming when shifting drives or
controllers.

The gjournal(8) GEOM class now supports the root file system.
Previously, an unclean shutdown would make it impossible to mount the
root file system at boot.

The gpart(8) utility has been updated. The APM scheme now supports Tivo
Series 1 partitions (read only), a new EBR scheme to support Extended
Boot Records has been added, the BSD scheme now support bootcode, and
bugs in the PC98 and VTOC8 schemes have been fixed.

An issue in gvinum(8) with access permissions to underlying disks used
by a gvinum plex has been fixed. If the plex is a raid5 plex and is
being written to, parity data might have to be read from the underlying
disks, requiring them to be opened for reading as well as writing.

The hptmv(4) driver has been updated to version 1.16 from the vendor.

The mmc(4) and mmcsd(4) drivers now support MMC and SDHC cards, high
speed timing, wide bus, and multiblock transfers.

[sparc64] The mpt(4) driver is now in the GENERIC kernel.

The sdhci(4) driver has been added. This supports PCI devices with class
8 and subclass 5 according to the SD Host Controller Specification.

The sdhci(4) driver now supports kernel dumping and a sysctl variable
hw.sdhci.debug for debug level.

The twa(4) driver now supports 64-bit DMA.

The mmc(4) mmcsd(4), and sdhci(4) driver are now included as kernel
modules.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.5 File Systems

The semantics of acl(3) extended access control lists has been changed
as follows:

-   The inode modification time (mtime) is not updated when extended
    attributes are added, modified, or removed.

-   The inode access time (atime) is not updated when extended
    attributes are queried.

The FreeBSD NFS file system now supports a sysctl variable
vfs.nfs.prime_access_cache to determine whether or not nfs_getattr()
will use an ACCESS RPC to prime the access cache instead of a simple
GETATTR RPC. This is because on many NFS servers an ACCESS RPC is much
more expensive to service than a GETATTR RPC for files in an NFSv3
mount. The sysctl variable is enabled by default to maintain the
previous behavior.

The FreeBSD UDF file system now supports a fifo.

The shared vnode locking for pathname lookups in the VFS(9) subsystem
has been improved. This is disabled by default. Setting a sysctl
variable vfs.lookup_shared to 1 enables it for better performance. Note
that the LOOKUP_SHARED kernel option equivalent to the sysctl variable
has been removed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Userland Changes

A bug in the atacontrol(8) utility, which prevents it from working when
/usr is not mounted or invoked from /rescue, has been fixed.

The btpand(8) daemon from NetBSD has been added. This daemon provides
support for Bluetooth Network Access Point (NAP), Group Ad-hoc Network
(GN) and Personal Area Network User (PANU) profiles.

The ncal(1) utility now supports multibyte characters.

The config(8) utility now supports multiple makeoption lines.

The csup(1) utility now supports CVSMode to fetch a complete CVS
repository. Note that the rsync transfer mode is currently disabled.

The dirname(1) utility now accepts multiple arguments in the same way
that basename(1) does.

The du(1) utility now supports an -l flag. When specified, the du(1)
utility counts a file with multiple hard links as multiple different
files.

The du(1) utility now supports an -A flag to display the apparent size
instead of the disk usage. This can be helpful when operating on
compressed volumes or sparse files.

The du(1) utility now supports a -B blocksize option to calculate block
counts in blocks of blocksize bytes. This is different from the -k or -m
options or setting BLOCKSIZE and gives an estimate of how much space the
examined file hierarchy would require on a file system with the given
blocksize. Unless in -A mode, blocksize is rounded up to the next
multiple of 512.

The dumpfs(8) utility now supports an -f flag, which causes it to list
all free fragments in the file system by fragment (block) number. This
new mode does the necessary arithmetic to generate absolute fragment
numbers rather than the cg-relative numbers printed in the default mode.

If -f is passed once, contiguous fragment ranges are collapsed into an
X-Y format as free block lists are currently printed in regular dumpfs
output. If specified twice, all block numbers are printed individually,
allowing both compact and more script-friendly representation.

The fetch(1) utility now supports an -i flag which supports the
If-Modified-Since HTTP 1.1 request. If specified it will cause the file
to be downloaded only if it is more recent than the mtime of the local
file. Also, libfetch now accepts the mtime in the url structure and a
flag to indicate when this behavior is desired.

The fsck(8) utility now supports a -C flag for check clean mode. This
checks if the file system was dismounted cleanly first and then skip
file system checks if true. Otherwise it does full checks.

The fsck(8) utility now supports a -D flag for damaged recovery mode,
which will enable certain aggressive operations that can make fsck(8) to
survive with file systems that has very serious data damage. This is a
useful last resort when on disk data damage is very serious and causes
fsck(8) to crash.

The getaddrinfo(3) function now supports SCTP.

A bug was fixed in the ipfw(8) utility which displays extra messages for
a NAT rule even when a -q flag is specified.

The ln(1) utility now supports a -w flag to check if the source file
actually exists. When the flag is specified and the file does not exist,
ln(1) will issue a warning message.

The make(1) utility now supports a -p flag to print the input graph
only, without executing any commands. The output is the same as -d g1.
When combined with -f /dev/null, only the built-in rules of make are
displayed.

The make(1) utility now supports a -Q flag to cause file banners not to
be generated in addition to the same effect of a -q flag when a -j
option is specified.

The make(1) utility now supports the .MAKE.JOB.PREFIX variable. If -j
and -v are specified, its output for each target is prefixed with a
token --- target --- the first part of which can be controlled via the
variable.

The make(1) utility now supports .MAKE.PID and .MAKE.PPID variable.
These are set to process ID of the make(1) process and its parent
process respectively.

The makefs(8) utility to create a file system image from a directory
tree has been added.

The mergemaster(8) utility now supports an -F option to automatically
install files that differ only in their version control ID strings.

The mount(8) utility now supports an -o mountprog=/somewhere/mount_xxx
option to force it to use the specified program to mount the file system
instead of calling nmount(2) directly. This is useful when you want to
use third party programs such as FUSE, for example.

The netstat(1) utility now reports unix(4) sockets' listen queue
statistics when an -L flag is specified.

A bug in the netstat(1) utility has been fixed. It crashed with the
following options in the previous versions:

    % netstat -m -N foo

A bug in the netstat(1) utility has been fixed. The -ss option now works
in the icmp6 section as expected.

The pciconf(8) utility now supports a -b flag, which lists any base
address registers (BAR) that are assigned resources for each device.

The powerd(8) program has been improved. Changes include reasonable CPU
load estimation on SMP systems and a new mode named as hiadaptive for
AC-powered systems. The hiadaptive mode raises the CPU frequency twice
as fast as adaptive, it drops the CPU frequency 4 times slower, prefers
twice lower CPU load and has an additional delay before leaving the
highest frequency after the period of maximum load.

The stat(1) utility now displays an octal representation of suid, sgid
and sticky bits when the -x flag is specified.

The strndup(3) function has been added.

The wc(1) utility now supports an -L flag to output the number of
characters in the longest input line.

A bug in the rpc.yppasswdd(8) program, which causes it to leave a zombie
process when a password or default shell is changed, has been fixed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4 Contributed Software

ISC BIND has been updated to version 9.4.3-P2.

The timezone database has been updated from the tzdata2008h release to
the tzdata2009f release.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

A bug in the pkg_create(1) utility, which prevents the -n flag from
working has been fixed.

The FreeBSD Ports Collection now supports multiple make(1) jobs in some
supported ports. This is automatically enabled when a port is marked as
MAKE_JOBS_SAFE and improves CPU utilization at the build stage by
passing an option -jX to the top level Makefile from the vendor. The
number X is set to the number of CPUs by default, and can be set by
users via a make(1) variable MAKE_JOBS_NUMBER. For more details, see
ports/Mk/bsd.port.mk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

The supported version of the GNOME desktop environment (x11/gnome2) has
been updated from 2.22 to 2.26.

The supported version of the KDE desktop environment has been updated
from 3.5.10 (x11/kde3) to 4.2.2 (x11/kde4).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

[amd64, i386] Beginning with FreeBSD 6.2-RELEASE, binary upgrades
between RELEASE versions (and snapshots of the various security
branches) are supported using the freebsd-update(8) utility. The binary
upgrade procedure will update unmodified userland utilities, as well as
unmodified GENERIC or SMP kernels distributed as a part of an official
FreeBSD release. The freebsd-update(8) utility requires that the host
being upgraded has Internet connectivity.

An older form of binary upgrade is supported through the Upgrade option
from the main sysinstall(8) menu on CDROM distribution media. This type
of binary upgrade may be useful on non-i386, non-amd64 machines or on
systems with no Internet connectivity.

Source-based upgrades (those based on recompiling the FreeBSD base
system from source code) from previous versions are supported, according
to the instructions in /usr/src/UPDATING.

  Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should, of course, only be attempted
  after backing up all data and configuration files.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
