[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 7.1-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2008, 2009 The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: stable/7/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml
186782 2009-01-05 15:38:45Z hrs $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “®” symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 7.1-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release or too late in
  the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
  documentation. This information includes security advisories, as well
  as news relating to the software or documentation that could affect
  its operation or usability. An up-to-date version of this document
  should always be consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 7.1-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 7.2-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains “late-breaking news” about FreeBSD
7.1-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the “current errata” for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 7-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

No advisories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Open Issues

[20090105] As in the Announcement of 7.1-RELEASE, certain Intel NICs
will come up as igb(4) instead of em(4) in this release. There are only
3 PCI ID's that should have their name changed from em(4) to igb(4):

-   0x10A78086

-   0x10A98086

-   0x10D68086

You should be able to determine if your card will change names by
running the following command:

    % pciconf -l
    . . .
    em0@pci0:0:25:0: class=0x020000 card=0x02381028 chip=0x10c08086 rev=0x02 hdr=0x00

and for the line representing your NIC (should be named em on older
systems, e.g. em0 or em1, etc) check the fourth column. If that says
chip=0x10a78086 (or one of the other two IDs given above) you will have
the adapter's name change.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Late-Breaking News and Corrections

[20090105] The Release Notes for 7.1-RELEASE should have mentioned that
the procstat(1) utility has been added. This is a process inspection
utility which provides both some of the missing functionality from
procfs(5) and new functionality for monitoring and debugging specific
processes.

[20090105] The Release Notes for 7.1-RELEASE should have mentioned
changes that the ae(4) driver has been added to provide support for the
Attansic/Atheros L2 FastEthernet controllers. This driver is not enabled
in GENERIC kernels for this release.

[20090105] The Release Notes for 7.1-RELEASE included the following
misdescriptions:

-   In the entry of linux(4) ABI support, get_setaffinity() should have
    been sched_setaffinity().

[20090105] The Release Notes for 7.1-RELEASE should have mentioned
changes that the jme(4) driver has been added to provide support for
PCIe adapters based on JMicron JMC250 gigabit Ethernet and JMC260 fast
Ethernet controllers.

[20090105] The Release Notes for 7.1-RELEASE should have mentioned
changes that the age(4) driver has been added to provide support for
Attansic/Atheros L1 gigabit Ethernet controller.

[20090105] The Release Notes for 7.1-RELEASE should have mentioned
changes that the malo(4) driver has been added to provide support for
Marvell Libertas 88W8335 based PCI network adapters.

[20090105] The Release Notes for 7.1-RELEASE should have mentioned
changes that the bm(4) driver has been added to provide support for
Apple Big Mac (BMAC) Ethernet controller, found on various Apple G3
models.

[20090105] The Release Notes for 7.1-RELEASE should have mentioned
changes that the et(4) driver has been added to provide support for
Agere ET1310 10/100/Gigabit Ethernet controller.

[20090105] The Release Notes for 7.1-RELEASE should have mentioned
changes that the glxsb(4) driver has been added to provide support for
the Security Block in AMD Geode LX processors.

[20090105] The Release Notes for 7.1-RELEASE should have mentioned that
FreeBSD now supports multiple routing tables. To enable this, the
following steps are needed:

-   Add the following kernel configuration option and rebuild the
    kernel. The 2 is the number of FIB (Forward Information Base,
    synonym for a routing table here). The maximum value is 16.

        options    ROUTETABLES=2

    The procedure for rebuilding the FreeBSD kernel is described in the
    FreeBSD Handbook.

    This number can be modified on boot time. To do so, add the
    following to /boot/loader.conf and reboot the system:

        net.fibs=6

-   Set a loader tunable net.my_fibnum if needed. This means the default
    number of routing tables. If not specified, 0 will be used.

-   Set a loader tunable net.add_addr_allfibs if needed. This enables to
    add routes to all FIBs for new interfaces by default. When this is
    set to 0, it will only allocate routes on interface changes for the
    FIB of the caller when adding a new set of addresses to an
    interface. Note that this tunable is set to 1 by default.

To select one of the FIBs, the new setfib(1) utility can be used. This
set an associated FIB with the process. For example:

    # setfib -3 ping target.example.com

The FIB #3 will be used for the ping(8) command.

The FIB which the packet will be associated with will be determined in
the following rules:

-   All packets which have a FIB associated with them will use the FIB.
    If not, FIB #0 will be used.

-   A packet received on an interface for forwarding uses FIB #0.

-   A TCP listen socket associated with an FIB will generate accept
    sockets which are associated with the same FIB.

-   A packet generated in response to other packet uses the FIB
    associated with the packet being responded to.

-   A packet generated on tunnel interfaces such as gif(4) and tun(4)
    will be encapsulated using the FIB of the process which set up the
    tunnel.

-   Routing messages will be associated with the process's FIB.

Also, the ipfw(8) now supports an action rule setfib. The following
action:

    setfib fibnum

will make the matched packet use the FIB specified in fibnum. The rule
processing continues at the next rule.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://www.FreeBSD.org/snapshots/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 7-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
