[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

-   RSS 2.0 Feed

FreeBSD Press Release: April 22, 1999

FreeBSD Used to Generate Spectacular Special Effects

Concord, CA, April 22, 1999: 32 Dual-Processor FreeBSD systems were used
to generate a large number of special effects in the cutting edge Warner
Brothers film, The Matrix.

Manex Visual Effects used 32 Dell Precision 410 Dual P-II/450 Processor
systems running FreeBSD as the core CG Render Farm. Charles Henrich, the
senior systems administrator at Manex, says, "We came to a point in the
production where we realized we just did not have enough computing power
on our existing SGI infrastructure to get through the 3-D intensive
sequences. It was at that point we decided on going with a FreeBSD based
solution, due to the ability to get the hardware quickly as well as the
reliability and ease of administration that FreeBSD provides us. Working
with Dell, we purchased 32 of these systems on a Wednesday, and had them
rendering in production by Saturday afternoon. It was truly an amazing
effort on everyone’s part, and I don’t believe it would’ve been possible
had we chosen to go with any other Operating System solution."

The FreeBSD operating system is a powerful, completely open-source
system based on the Berkeley Software Distribution of UNIX. It is
available free of charge from numerous Internet websites and also on
CD-ROM from Walnut Creek CDROM, and includes thousands of ported
applications including 3-D graphics rendering and many other equally
powerful tools. FreeBSD is optimized for use on the Intel x86 processor
line that is the heart of today’s versatile commodity personal
computers. Infinitely customizable, FreeBSD is at the heart of such
Internet powerhouse applications as Yahoo! and U.S. West because it is
unencumbered by commercial license restrictions and can be copied and
modified freely.

For more information on FreeBSD, visit http://www.FreeBSD.org/ and
http://www.wccdrom.com/. For more information about Manex Visual
Effects, please visit http://www.mvfx.com/ .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: January 26, 2021 by Sergio Carlavilla Delgado

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
