[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/i386 5.3-RELEASE Hardware Notes

The FreeBSD Documentation Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 The FreeBSD Documentation
Project

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 Supported Processors and Motherboards

3 Supported Devices

3.1 Disk Controllers

3.2 Ethernet Interfaces

3.3 FDDI Interfaces

3.4 ATM Interfaces

3.5 Wireless Network Interfaces

3.6 Miscellaneous Networks

3.7 ISDN Interfaces

3.8 Serial Interfaces

3.9 Audio Devices

3.10 Camera and Video Capture Devices

3.11 USB Devices

3.12 IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Devices

3.13 Bluetooth Devices

3.14 Cryptographic Accelerators

3.15 Miscellaneous

1 Introduction

This document contains the hardware compatibility notes for FreeBSD
5.3-RELEASE on the i386 hardware platform (also referred to as
FreeBSD/i386 5.3-RELEASE). It lists devices known to work on this
platform, as well as some notes on boot-time kernel customization that
may be useful when attempting to configure support for new devices.

  Note: This document includes information specific to the i386 hardware
  platform. Versions of the hardware compatibility notes for other
  architectures will differ in some details.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Supported Processors and Motherboards

FreeBSD/i386 runs on a wide variety of ``IBM PC compatible'' machines.
Due to the wide range of hardware available for this architecture, it is
impossible to exhaustively list all combinations of equipment supported
by FreeBSD. Nevertheless, some general guidelines are presented here.

Almost all i386-compatible processors are supported. All Intel
processors beginning with the 80386 are supported, including the 80386,
80486, Pentium, Pentium Pro, Pentium II, Pentium III, Pentium 4, and
variants thereof, such as the Xeon and Celeron processors. (However,
FreeBSD 5.2-RELEASE and later no longer support the 80386SX processor.)
All i386-compatible AMD processors are also supported, including the
Am486, Am5x86, K5, K6 (and variants), Athlon (including Athlon-MP,
Athlon-XP, Athlon-4, and Athlon Thunderbird), and Duron processors. The
AMD Élan SC520 embedded processor is supported. The Transmeta Crusoe is
recognized and supported, as are i386-compatible processors from Cyrix
and NexGen.

There is a wide variety of motherboards available for this architecture.
Motherboards using the ISA, VLB, EISA, AGP, and PCI expansion busses are
well-supported. There is some limited support for the MCA
(``MicroChannel'') expansion bus used in the IBM PS/2 line of PCs.

Symmetric multi-processor (SMP) systems are generally supported by
FreeBSD, although in some cases, BIOS or motherboard bugs may generate
some problems. Perusal of the archives of the FreeBSD symmetric
multiprocessing mailing list may yield some clues.

FreeBSD will take advantage of HyperThreading (HTT) support on Intel
CPUs that support this feature. A kernel with the options SMP feature
enabled will automatically detect the additional logical processors. The
default FreeBSD scheduler treats the logical processors the same as
additional physical processors; in other words, no attempt is made to
optimize scheduling decisions given the shared resources between logical
processors within the same CPU. Because this naive scheduling can result
in suboptimal performance, under certain circumstances it may be useful
to disable the logical processors with the the machdep.hlt_logical_cpus
sysctl variable. It is also possible to halt any CPU in the idle loop
with the machdep.hlt_cpus sysctl variable. The smp(4) manual page has
more details.

FreeBSD will take advantage of Physical Address Extensions (PAE) support
on CPUs that support this feature. A kernel with the PAE feature enabled
will detect memory above 4 gigabytes and allow it to be used by the
system. This feature places constraints on the device drivers and other
features of FreeBSD which may be used; consult the pae(4) manpage for
more details.

FreeBSD will generally run on i386-based laptops, albeit with varying
levels of support for certain hardware features such as sound, graphics,
power management, and PCCARD expansion slots. These features tend to
vary in idiosyncratic ways between machines, and frequently require
special-case support in FreeBSD to work around hardware bugs or other
oddities. When in doubt, a search of the archives of the FreeBSD laptop
computer mailing list may be useful.

Most modern laptops (as well as many desktops) use the Advanced
Configuration and Power Management (ACPI) standard. FreeBSD supports
ACPI via the ACPI Component Architecture reference implementation from
Intel, as described in the acpi(4) manual page. The use of ACPI causes
instabilities on some machines and it may be necessary to disable the
ACPI driver, which is normally loaded via a kernel module. This may be
accomplished by adding the following line to /boot/device.hints:

    hint.acpi.0.disabled="1"

Users debugging ACPI-related problems may find it useful to disable
portions of the ACPI functionality. The acpi(4) manual page has more
information on how to do this via loader tunables.

ACPI depends on a Differentiated System Descriptor Table (DSDT) provided
by each machine's BIOS. Some machines have bad or incomplete DSDTs,
which prevents ACPI from functioning correctly. Replacement DSDTs for
some machines can be found at the DSDT section of the ACPI4Linux project
Web site. FreeBSD can use these DSDTs to override the DSDT provided by
the BIOS; see the acpi(4) manual page for more information.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Supported Devices

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/hardware/common/dev.sgml,v
1.227.2.14.2.1 2004/11/03 00:18:51 simon Exp $

This section describes the devices currently known to be supported by
with FreeBSD on the i386 platform. Other configurations may also work,
but simply have not been tested yet. Feedback, updates, and corrections
to this list are encouraged.

Where possible, the drivers applicable to each device or class of
devices is listed. If the driver in question has a manual page in the
FreeBSD base distribution (most should), it is referenced here.
Information on specific models of supported devices, controllers, etc.
can be found in the manual pages.

  Note: The device lists in this document are being generated
  automatically from FreeBSD manual pages. This means that some devices,
  which are supported by multiple drivers, may appear multiple times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1 Disk Controllers

IDE/ATA controllers ( ata(4) driver)

The adapters supported by the aic(4) driver include:

-   Adaptec AHA-1505 (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1510A, AHA-1510B (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1520A, AHA-1520B (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1522A, AHA-1522B (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1535 (ISA)

-   Creative Labs SoundBlaster SCSI host adapter (ISA)

-   Adaptec AHA-1460, AHA-1460B, AHA-1460C, AHA-1460D (PC Card)

-   Adaptec AHA-1030B, AHA-1030P (PC98)

-   NEC PC-9801-100 (PC98)

The aha(4) driver supports the following SCSI host adapters:

-   Adaptec AHA-154xB

-   Adaptec AHA-154xC

-   Adaptec AHA-154xCF

-   Adaptec AHA-154xCP

-   Adaptec AHA-1640

-   Adaptec AHA-174x in 154x emulation mode

-   DTC 3290 SCSI controller in 1542 emulation mode

-   Tekram SCSI controllers in 154x emulation mode

The ahb(4) driver supports the following SCSI host adapters:

-   Adaptec AHA-1740

-   Adaptec AHA-1742

-   Adaptec AHA-1740A

-   Adaptec AHA-1742A

The ahc(4) driver supports the following SCSI host adapter chips and
SCSI controller cards:

-   Adaptec AIC7770 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7850 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7860 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7870 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7880 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7890 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7891 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7892 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7895 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7896 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7897 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7899 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec 274X(W)

-   Adaptec 274X(T)

-   Adaptec 284X

-   Adaptec 2910

-   Adaptec 2915

-   Adaptec 2920

-   Adaptec 2930C

-   Adaptec 2930U2

-   Adaptec 2940

-   Adaptec 2940J

-   Adaptec 2940N

-   Adaptec 2940U

-   Adaptec 2940AU

-   Adaptec 2940UW

-   Adaptec 2940UW Dual

-   Adaptec 2940UW Pro

-   Adaptec 2940U2W

-   Adaptec 2940U2B

-   Adaptec 2950U2W

-   Adaptec 2950U2B

-   Adaptec 19160B

-   Adaptec 29160B

-   Adaptec 29160N

-   Adaptec 3940

-   Adaptec 3940U

-   Adaptec 3940AU

-   Adaptec 3940UW

-   Adaptec 3940AUW

-   Adaptec 3940U2W

-   Adaptec 3950U2

-   Adaptec 3960

-   Adaptec 39160

-   Adaptec 3985

-   Adaptec 4944UW

-   NEC PC-9821Xt13 (PC-98)

-   NEC RvII26 (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B02L/B09 (PC-98)

-   NEC SV-98/2-B03 (PC-98)

-   Many motherboards with on-board SCSI support

The ahd(4) driver supports the following:

-   Adaptec AIC7901 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7901A host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7902 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec 29320 host adapter

-   Adaptec 39320 host adapter

-   Many motherboards with on-board SCSI support

Controllers supported by the aac(4) driver include:

-   Adaptec AAC-364

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 2120S

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 2130S

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 2200S

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 2410SA

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 2810SA

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 5400S

-   Dell CERC SATA RAID 2

-   Dell PERC 2/Si

-   Dell PERC 2/QC

-   Dell PERC 3/Si

-   Dell PERC 3/Di

-   Dell PERC 320/DC

-   HP NetRAID 4M

The adv(4) driver supports the following SCSI controllers:

-   AdvanSys ABP510/5150

-   AdvanSys ABP5140

-   AdvanSys ABP5142

-   AdvanSys ABP902/3902

-   AdvanSys ABP3905

-   AdvanSys ABP915

-   AdvanSys ABP920

-   AdvanSys ABP3922

-   AdvanSys ABP3925

-   AdvanSys ABP930, ABP930U, ABP930UA

-   AdvanSys ABP960, ABP960U

-   AdvanSys ABP542

-   AdvanSys ABP742

-   AdvanSys ABP842

-   AdvanSys ABP940

-   AdvanSys ABP940UA/3940UA

-   AdvanSys ABP940U

-   AdvanSys ABP3960UA

-   AdvanSys ABP970, ABP970U

-   AdvanSys ABP752

-   AdvanSys ABP852

-   AdvanSys ABP950

-   AdvanSys ABP980, ABP980U

-   AdvanSys ABP980UA/3980UA

-   MELCO IFC-USP (PC-98)

-   RATOC REX-PCI30 (PC-98)

-   @Nifty FNECHARD IFC-USUP-TX (PC-98)

The adw(4) driver supports SCSI controllers including:

-   AdvanSys ABP940UW/ABP3940UW

-   AdvanSys ABP950UW

-   AdvanSys ABP970UW

-   AdvanSys ABP3940U2W

-   AdvanSys ABP3950U2W

The bt(4) driver supports the following BusLogic MultiMaster ``W'',
``C'', ``S'', and ``A'' series and compatible SCSI host adapters:

-   BusLogic BT-445C

-   BusLogic BT-445S

-   BusLogic BT-540CF

-   BusLogic BT-542B

-   BusLogic BT-542B

-   BusLogic BT-542D

-   BusLogic BT-545C

-   BusLogic BT-545S

-   BusLogic/BusTek BT-640

-   BusLogic BT-742A

-   BusLogic BT-742A

-   BusLogic BT-747C

-   BusLogic BT-747D

-   BusLogic BT-747S

-   BusLogic BT-757C

-   BusLogic BT-757CD

-   BusLogic BT-757D

-   BusLogic BT-757S

-   BusLogic BT-946C

-   BusLogic BT-948

-   BusLogic BT-956C

-   BusLogic BT-956CD

-   BusLogic BT-958

-   BusLogic BT-958D

-   Storage Dimensions SDC3211B / SDC3211F

AMI FastDisk Host Adapters that are true BusLogic MultiMaster clones are
also supported by the bt(4) driver.

The dpt(4) driver provides support for the following RAID adapters:

-   DPT Smart Cache Plus

-   Smart Cache II (PM2?2?, PM2022 [EISA], PM2024/PM2124 [PCI]) (Gen2)

-   Smart RAID II (PM3?2?, PM3021, PM3222)

-   Smart Cache III (PM2?3?)

-   Smart RAID III (PM3?3?, PM3332 [EISA], PM3334UW [PCI]) (Gen3)

-   Smart Cache IV (PM2?4?, PM2042 [EISA], PM2044/PM2144 [PCI]) (Gen4)

-   Smart RAID IV

The adapters currently supported by the asr(4) driver include the
following:

-   Adaptec Zero-Channel SCSI RAID 2000S, 2005S, 2010S, 2015S

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 2100S, 2110S

-   Adaptec ATA-100 RAID 2400A

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 3200S, 3210S

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 3400S, 3410S

-   Adaptec SmartRAID PM1554

-   Adaptec SmartRAID PM1564

-   Adaptec SmartRAID PM2554

-   Adaptec SmartRAID PM2564

-   Adaptec SmartRAID PM2664

-   Adaptec SmartRAID PM2754

-   Adaptec SmartRAID PM2865

-   Adaptec SmartRAID PM3754

-   Adaptec SmartRAID PM3755U2B / SmartRAID V Millennium

-   Adaptec SmartRAID PM3757

-   DEC KZPCC-AC (LVD 1-ch, 4MB or 16MB cache), DEC KZPCC-CE (LVD 3-ch,
    64MB cache), DEC KZPCC-XC (LVD 1-ch, 16MB cache), DEC KZPCC-XE (LVD
    3-ch, 64MB cache) -- rebadged SmartRAID V Millennium

The amr(4) driver supports the following:

-   AMI MegaRAID 320-1

-   AMI MegaRAID 320-2

-   AMI MegaRAID 320-4X

-   AMI MegaRAID Series 418

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1200 (Series 428)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1300 (Series 434)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1400 (Series 438)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1500 (Series 467)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1600 (Series 471)

-   AMI MegaRAID Elite 1500 (Series 467)

-   AMI MegaRAID Elite 1600 (Series 493)

-   AMI MegaRAID Elite 1650 (Series 4xx)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 100 (Series 466WS)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 200 (Series 466)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 300 (Series 490)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 500 (Series 475)

-   Dell PERC

-   Dell PERC 2/SC

-   Dell PERC 2/DC

-   Dell PERC 3/DCL

-   Dell PERC 3/QC

-   Dell PERC 4/Di

-   HP NetRAID-1/Si

-   HP NetRAID-3/Si (D4943A)

-   HP Embedded NetRAID

  Note: Booting from these controllers is supported. EISA adapters are
  not supported.

Controllers supported by the mlx(4) driver include:

-   Mylex DAC960P

-   Mylex DAC960PD / DEC KZPSC (Fast Wide)

-   Mylex DAC960PDU

-   Mylex DAC960PL

-   Mylex DAC960PJ

-   Mylex DAC960PG

-   Mylex DAC960PU / DEC PZPAC (Ultra Wide)

-   Mylex AcceleRAID 150 (DAC960PRL)

-   Mylex AcceleRAID 250 (DAC960PTL1)

-   Mylex eXtremeRAID 1100 (DAC1164P)

-   RAIDarray 230 controllers, aka the Ultra-SCSI DEC KZPAC-AA (1-ch,
    4MB cache), KZPAC-CA (3-ch, 4MB), KZPAC-CB (3-ch, 8MB cache)

All major firmware revisions (2.x, 3.x, 4.x and 5.x) are supported,
however it is always advisable to upgrade to the most recent firmware
available for the controller. Compatible Mylex controllers not listed
should work, but have not been verified.

  Note: Booting from these controllers is supported. EISA adapters are
  not supported.

Controllers supported by the mly(4) driver include:

-   Mylex AcceleRAID 160

-   Mylex AcceleRAID 170

-   Mylex AcceleRAID 352

-   Mylex eXtremeRAID 2000

-   Mylex eXtremeRAID 3000

Compatible Mylex controllers not listed should work, but have not been
verified.

The twe(4) driver supports the following ATA RAID controllers:

-   AMCC's 3ware 5000 series

-   AMCC's 3ware 6000 series

-   AMCC's 3ware 7000-2

-   AMCC's 3ware 7006-2

-   AMCC's 3ware 7500-4LP

-   AMCC's 3ware 7500-8

-   AMCC's 3ware 7500-12

-   AMCC's 3ware 7506-4LP

-   AMCC's 3ware 7506-8

-   AMCC's 3ware 7506-12

-   AMCC's 3ware 8006-2LP

-   AMCC's 3ware 8500-4LP

-   AMCC's 3ware 8500-8

-   AMCC's 3ware 8500-12

-   AMCC's 3ware 8506-4LP

-   AMCC's 3ware 8506-8

-   AMCC's 3ware 8506-8MI

-   AMCC's 3ware 8506-12

-   AMCC's 3ware 8506-12MI

The twa(4) driver supports the following PATA/SATA RAID controllers:

-   AMCC's 3ware 9500S-4LP

-   AMCC's 3ware 9500S-8

-   AMCC's 3ware 9500S-8MI

-   AMCC's 3ware 9500S-12

-   AMCC's 3ware 9500S-12MI

The ncr(4) driver provides support for the following NCR/Symbios SCSI
controller chips:

-   53C810

-   53C810A

-   53C815

-   53C820

-   53C825A

-   53C860

-   53C875

-   53C875J

-   53C885

-   53C895

-   53C895A

-   53C896

-   53C1510D

The following add-on boards are known to be supported:

-   I-O DATA SC-98/PCI (PC-98)

-   I-O DATA SC-PCI (PC-98)

The sym(4) driver provides support for the following Symbios/LSI Logic
PCI SCSI controllers:

-   53C810

-   53C810A

-   53C815

-   53C825

-   53C825A

-   53C860

-   53C875

-   53C876

-   53C895

-   53C895A

-   53C896

-   53C897

-   53C1000

-   53C1000R

-   53C1010-33

-   53C1010-66

-   53C1510D

The SCSI controllers supported by sym(4) can be either embedded on a
motherboard, or on one of the following add-on boards:

-   ASUS SC-200, SC-896

-   Data Technology DTC3130 (all variants)

-   DawiControl DC2976UW

-   Diamond FirePort (all)

-   I-O DATA SC-UPCI (PC-98)

-   Logitec LHA-521UA (PC-98)

-   NCR cards (all)

-   Symbios cards (all)

-   Tekram DC390W, 390U, 390F, 390U2B, 390U2W, 390U3D, and 390U3W

-   Tyan S1365

The following devices are currently supported by the ncv(4) driver:

-   I-O DATA PCSC-DV

-   KME KXLC002 (TAXAN ICD-400PN, etc.), KXLC004, and UJDCD450

-   Macnica Miracle SCSI-II mPS110

-   Media Intelligent MSC-110, MSC-200

-   NEC PC-9801N-J03R

-   New Media Corporation BASICS SCSI

-   Qlogic Fast SCSI

-   RATOC REX-9530, REX-5572 (SCSI only)

Controllers supported by the stg(4) driver include:

-   Adaptec 2920/A

-   Future Domain SCSI2GO

-   Future Domain TMC-18XX/3260

-   IBM SCSI PCMCIA Card

-   ICM PSC-2401 SCSI

-   MELCO IFC-SC

-   RATOC REX-5536, REX-5536AM, REX-5536M, REX-9836A

Note that the Adaptec 2920C is supported by the ahc(4) driver.

Cards supported by the isp(4) driver include:

-   ISP1000

-   PTI SBS440

-   ISP1020

-   ISP1040

-   PTI SBS450

-   Qlogic 1240

-   Qlogic 1020

-   Qlogic 1040

-   Qlogic 1080

-   Qlogic 1280

-   Qlogic 12160

-   Qlogic 2100

-   Qlogic 2102

-   Qlogic 2200

-   Qlogic 2202

-   Qlogic 2204

-   Qlogic 2300

-   Qlogic 2312

-   PTI SBS470

-   Antares P-0033

Controllers supported by the amd(4) driver include:

-   MELCO IFC-DP (PC-98)

-   Tekram DC390

-   Tekram DC390T

Controllers supported by the nsp(4) driver include:

-   Alpha-Data AD-PCS201

-   I-O DATA CBSC16

Adaptec AIC-7110 Parallel to SCSI interfaces ( vpo(4) driver)

The following controllers are supported by the ida(4) driver:

-   Compaq SMART Array 221

-   Compaq Integrated SMART Array Controller

-   Compaq SMART Array 4200

-   Compaq SMART Array 4250ES

-   Compaq SMART 3200 Controller

-   Compaq SMART 3100ES Controller

-   Compaq SMART-2/DH Controller

-   Compaq SMART-2/SL Controller

-   Compaq SMART-2/P Controller

-   Compaq SMART-2/E Controller

-   Compaq SMART Controller

Controllers supported by the ciss(4) driver include:

-   Compaq Smart Array 5300

-   Compaq Smart Array 532

-   Compaq Smart Array 5i

-   HP Smart Array 5312

-   HP Smart Array 6i

-   HP Smart Array 641

-   HP Smart Array 642

-   HP Smart Array 6400

-   HP Smart Array 6400 EM

-   HP Smart Array 6422

-   HP Smart Array V100

-   HP Modular Smart Array 20 (MSA20)

-   HP Modular Smart Array 500 (MSA500)

Controllers supported by the iir(4) driver include:

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCMR

-   Intel Server RAID Controller U3-l (SRCU31a)

-   Intel Server RAID Controller U3-1L (SRCU31La)

-   Intel Server RAID Controller U3-2 (SRCU32)

-   All past and future releases of Intel and ICP RAID Controllers.

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCU21 (discontinued)

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCU31 (older revision, not compatible)

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCU31L (older revision, not compatible)

The SRCU31 and SRCU31L can be updated via a firmware update available
from Intel.

Promise SuperTrak ATA RAID controllers ( pst(4) driver)

The hptmv(4) driver supports the HighPoint RocketRAID 182x SATA
controllers.

Controllers supported by the ips(4) driver include:

-   IBM ServeRAID 3H

-   ServeRAID 4L/4M/4H

-   ServeRAID Series 5

-   ServeRAID 6i/6M

The following controllers are supported by the mpt(4) driver:

-   LSI Logic 53c1030 (Dual Ultra320 SCSI)

-   LSI Logic FC909 (1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC909A (Dual 1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC919 (2Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC929 (Dual 2Gb/s Fibre Channel)

The SCSI controller chips supprted by the mpt(4) driver can be found
onboard on many systems including:

-   Dell PowerEdge 1750

-   IBM eServer xSeries 335

SCSI controllers supported by the trm(4) driver include:

-   Tekram DC-315 PCI Ultra SCSI adapter without BIOS and internal SCSI
    connector

-   Tekram DC-315U PCI Ultra SCSI adapter without BIOS

-   Tekram DC-395F PCI Ultra-Wide SCSI adapter with flash BIOS and
    68-pin external SCSI connector

-   Tekram DC-395U PCI Ultra SCSI adapter with flash BIOS

-   Tekram DC-395UW PCI Ultra-Wide SCSI adapter with flash BIOS

-   Tekram DC-395U2W PCI Ultra2-Wide SCSI adapter with flash BIOS

For the Tekram DC-310/U and DC-390F/U/UW/U2B/U2W/U3W PCI SCSI host
adapters, use the sym(4) driver.

The wds(4) driver supports the WD7000 SCSI controller.

With all supported SCSI controllers, full support is provided for
SCSI-I, SCSI-II, and SCSI-III peripherals, including hard disks, optical
disks, tape drives (including DAT, 8mm Exabyte, Mammoth, and DLT),
medium changers, processor target devices and CD-ROM drives. WORM
devices that support CD-ROM commands are supported for read-only access
by the CD-ROM drivers (such as cd(4)). WORM/CD-R/CD-RW writing support
is provided by cdrecord(1), which is a part of the sysutils/cdrtools
port in the Ports Collection.

The following CD-ROM type systems are supported at this time:

-   SCSI interface (also includes ProAudio Spectrum and SoundBlaster
    SCSI) (cd(4))

-   Matsushita CR-562, CR-563, and compatibles ( matcd(4) driver)

-   Sony proprietary interface (all models) ( scd(4))

-   ATAPI IDE interface ( acd(4))

The following device is unmaintained:

-   Mitsumi proprietary CD-ROM interface (all models) ( mcd(4))

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2 Ethernet Interfaces

Adapters supported by the sf(4) driver include:

-   ANA-62011 64-bit single port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62022 64-bit dual port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62044 64-bit quad port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-69011 32-bit single port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62020 64-bit single port 100baseFX adapter

The ti(4) driver supports Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the Alteon
Tigon I and II chips. The ti(4) driver has been tested with the
following adapters:

-   3Com 3c985-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter (Tigon 1)

-   3Com 3c985B-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter (Tigon 2)

-   Alteon AceNIC V Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseSX)

-   Alteon AceNIC V Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseT)

-   Digital EtherWORKS 1000SX PCI Gigabit adapter

-   Netgear GA620 Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseSX)

-   Netgear GA620T Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseT)

The following adapters should also be supported but have not yet been
tested:

-   Asante GigaNIX1000T Gigabit Ethernet adapter

-   Asante PCI 1000BASE-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter

-   Farallon PN9000SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter

-   NEC Gigabit Ethernet

-   Silicon Graphics PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapter

The pcn(4) driver supports adapters and embedded controllers based on
the AMD PCnet/FAST, PCnet/FAST+, PCnet/FAST III, PCnet/PRO and
PCnet/Home Fast Ethernet chips:

-   AMD Am53C974/Am79C970/Am79C974 PCnet-PCI

-   AMD Am79C970A PCnet-PCI II

-   AMD Am79C971 PCnet-FAST

-   AMD Am79C972 PCnet-FAST+

-   AMD Am79C973/Am79C975 PCnet-FAST III

-   AMD Am79C976 PCnet-PRO

-   AMD PCnet/Home HomePNA

-   Allied-Telesis LA-PCI

-   Contec C-NET(98)S (PC-98)

-   NEC SV-98/2-B05, B06

The lnc(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Novell NE2100

-   Novell NE32-VL

-   Isolan AT 4141-0 (16 bit)

-   Isolan BICC

-   Isolink 4110 (8 bit)

-   Diamond HomeFree

-   Digital DEPCA

-   Hewlett Packard Vectra 486/66XM

-   Hewlett Packard Vectra XU

Also supported are adapters working with the pcn(4) driver. The lnc(4)
driver runs these in compatibility mode, thus the pcn(4) driver should
be preferred.

SMC 83c17x (EPIC)-based Ethernet NICs (tx(4) driver)

The ed(4) driver supports the following Ethernet NICs:

-   3Com 3c503 Etherlink II

-   AR-P500 Ethernet

-   Accton EN1644 (old model), EN1646 (old model), EN2203 (old model)
    (110pin) (flags 0xd00000)

-   Accton EN2212/EN2216/UE2216

-   Allied Telesis CentreCOM LA100-PCM_V2

-   Allied Telesis LA-98 (flags 0x000000) (PC-98)

-   Allied Telesis SIC-98, SIC-98NOTE (110pin), SIU-98 (flags 0x600000)
    (PC-98)

-   Allied Telesis SIU-98-D (flags 0x610000) (PC-98)

-   AmbiCom 10BaseT card

-   Bay Networks NETGEAR FA410TXC Fast Ethernet

-   CNet BC40 adapter

-   Compex Net-A adapter

-   Contec C-NET(98), RT-1007(98), C-NET(9N) (110pin) (flags 0xa00000)
    (PC-98)

-   Contec C-NET(98)E-A, C-NET(98)L-A, C-NET(98)P (flags 0x300000)
    (PC-98)

-   Corega Ether98-T (flags 0x000000) (PC-98)

-   Corega Ether PCC-T/EtherII PCC-T/FEther PCC-TXF/PCC-TXD

-   CyQ've ELA-010

-   DEC EtherWorks DE305

-   Danpex EN-6200P2

-   D-Link DE-298, DE-298P (flags 0x500000) (PC-98)

-   D-Link DE-650/660

-   D-Link IC-CARD/IC-CARD+ Ethernet

-   ELECOM LD-98P (flags 0x500000) (PC-98)

-   ELECOM LD-BDN, LD-NW801G (flags 0x200000) (PC-98)

-   ELECOM Laneed LD-CDL/TX, LD-CDF, LD-CDS, LD-10/100CD, LD-CDWA
    (DP83902A)

-   HP PC Lan+ 27247B and 27252A

-   IBM Creditcard Ethernet I/II

-   ICM AD-ET2-T, DT-ET-25, DT-ET-T5, IF-2766ET, IF-2771ET, NB-ET-T
    (110pin) (flags 0x500000) (PC-98)

-   I-O DATA LA/T-98, LA/T-98SB, LA2/T-98, ET/T-98 (flags 0x900000)
    (PC-98)

-   I-O DATA ET2/T-PCI

-   I-O DATA PCLATE

-   Kansai KLA-98C/T (flags 0x900000) (PC-98)

-   Kingston KNE-PC2, KNE-PCM/x Ethernet

-   Linksys EC2T/PCMPC100/PCM100, PCMLM56

-   Linksys EtherFast 10/100 PC Card, Combo PCMCIA Ethernet Card
    (PCMPC100 V2)

-   Logitec LAN-98T (flags 0xb00000) (PC-98)

-   MACNICA Ethernet ME1 for JEIDA

-   MACNICA ME98 (flags 0x900000) (PC-98)

-   MACNICA NE2098 (flags 0x400000) (PC-98)

-   MELCO EGY-98 (flags 0x300000) (PC-98)

-   MELCO LGH-98, LGY-98, LGY-98-N (110pin), IND-SP, IND-SS (flags
    0x400000) (PC-98)

-   MELCO LGY-PCI-TR

-   MELCO LPC-T/LPC2-T/LPC2-CLT/LPC2-TX/LPC3-TX/LPC3-CLX

-   NDC Ethernet Instant-Link

-   NEC PC-9801-77, PC-9801-78 (flags 0x910000) (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9801-107, PC-9801-108 (flags 0x800000) (PC-98)

-   National Semiconductor InfoMover NE4100

-   NetGear FA-410TX

-   NetVin 5000

-   Network Everywhere Ethernet 10BaseT PC Card

-   Networld 98X3 (flags 0xd00000) (PC-98)

-   Networld EC-98X, EP-98X (flags 0xd10000) (PC-98)

-   Novell NE1000/NE2000/NE2100

-   PLANEX ENW-8300-T

-   PLANEX EN-2298-C (flags 0x200000) (PC-98)

-   PLANEX EN-2298P-T, EN-2298-T (flags 0x500000) (PC-98)

-   PLANEX FNW-3600-T

-   RealTek 8029

-   SMC Elite 16 WD8013

-   SMC Elite Ultra

-   SMC EtherEZ98 (flags 0x000000) (PC-98)

-   SMC WD8003E/WD8003EBT/WD8003S/WD8003SBT/WD8003W/WD8013EBT/WD8013W
    and clones

-   Socket LP-E

-   Surecom EtherPerfect EP-427

-   Surecom NE-34

-   TDK LAK-CD031, Grey Cell GCS2000 Ethernet Card

-   Telecom Device SuperSocket RE450T

-   VIA VT86C926

-   Winbond W89C940

C-Bus, ISA, PCI and PC Card devices are supported.

Adapters supported by the rl(4) driver include:

-   Accton ``Cheetah'' EN1207D (MPX 5030/5038; RealTek 8139 clone)

-   Allied Telesyn AT2550

-   Allied Telesyn AT2500TX

-   Belkin F5D5000

-   BUFFALO(Melco INC.) LPC-CB-CLX(CardBus)

-   Compaq HNE-300

-   CompUSA no-name 10/100 PCI Ethernet NIC

-   Corega FEther CB-TXD

-   Corega FEtherII CB-TXD

-   D-Link DFE-530TX+

-   D-Link DFE-538TX (same as 530+?)

-   D-Link DFE-690TXD

-   Edimax EP-4103DL CardBus

-   Encore ENL832-TX 10/100 M PCI

-   Farallon NetLINE 10/100 PCI

-   Genius GF100TXR,

-   GigaFast Ethernet EE100-AXP

-   KTX-9130TX 10/100 Fast Ethernet

-   LevelOne FPC-0106TX

-   Longshine LCS-8038TX-R

-   NDC Communications NE100TX-E

-   Netronix Inc. EA-1210 NetEther 10/100

-   Nortel Networks 10/100BaseTX

-   OvisLink LEF-8129TX

-   OvisLink LEF-8139TX

-   Peppercon AG ROL-F

-   Planex FNW-3800-TX

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 PCI 1211-TX

-   SOHO(PRAGMATIC) UE-1211C

The wb(4) driver supports Winbond W89C840F based Fast Ethernet adapters
and embedded controllers including:

-   Trendware TE100-PCIE

The vr(4) driver supports VIA Technologies Rhine I, Rhine II, and Rhine
III based Fast Ethernet adapters including:

-   D-Link DFE530-TX

-   Hawking Technologies PN102TX

-   AOpen/Acer ALN-320

The sis(4) driver supports Silicon Integrated Systems SiS 900 and SiS
7016 based Fast Ethernet adapters and embedded controllers, as well as
Fast Ethernet adapters based on the National Semiconductor DP83815
(MacPhyter) chip. Supported adapters include:

-   @Nifty FNECHARD IFC USUP-TX

-   MELCO LGY-PCI-TXC

-   Netgear FA311-TX (DP83815)

-   Netgear FA312-TX (DP83815)

-   SiS 630, 635, and 735 motherboard chipsets

The nge(4) driver supports National Semiconductor DP83820 and DP83821
based Gigabit Ethernet adapters including:

-   SMC EZ Card 1000 (SMC9462TX)

-   D-Link DGE-500T

-   Asante FriendlyNet GigaNIX 1000TA and 1000TPC

-   Addtron AEG320T

-   LinkSys EG1032 (32-bit PCI) and EG1064 (64-bit PCI)

-   Surecom Technology EP-320G-TX

-   Netgear GA622T

-   Netgear GA621

-   Ark PC SOHO-GA2500T (32-bit PCI) and SOHO-GA2000T (64-bit PCI)

-   Trendware TEG-PCITX (32-bit PCI) and TEG-PCITX2 (64-bit PCI)

The ste(4) driver supports Sundance Technologies ST201 based Fast
Ethernet adapters and embedded controllers including:

-   D-Link DFE-530TXS

-   D-Link DFE-550TX

Adapters supported by the sk(4) driver include:

-   3COM 3C940 single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   Belkin F5D5005 single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   Linksys EG1032 single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9521 SK-NET GE-T single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9821 SK-NET GE-T single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9822 SK-NET GE-T dual port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9841 SK-NET GE-LX single port, single mode fiber adapter

-   SK-9842 SK-NET GE-LX dual port, single mode fiber adapter

-   SK-9843 SK-NET GE-SX single port, multimode fiber adapter

-   SK-9844 SK-NET GE-SX dual port, multimode fiber adapter

-   SMC 9452TX single port, 1000baseT adapter

The tl(4) driver supports Texas Instruments ThunderLAN based Ethernet
and Fast Ethernet adapters including a large number of Compaq PCI
Ethernet adapters. Also supported are:

-   Olicom OC-2135/2138 10/100 TX UTP adapter

-   Olicom OC-2325/OC-2326 10/100 TX UTP adapter

-   Racore 8148 10baseT/100baseTX/100baseFX adapter

-   Racore 8165 10/100baseTX adapter

The tl(4) driver also supports the built-in Ethernet adapters of various
Compaq Prosignia servers and Compaq Deskpro desktop machines including:

-   Compaq Netelligent 10

-   Compaq Netelligent 10 T PCI UTP/Coax

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 Dual-Port

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 Proliant

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 TX Embedded UTP

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 TX UTP

-   Compaq NetFlex 3P

-   Compaq NetFlex 3P Integrated

-   Compaq NetFlex 3P w/BNC

The dc(4) driver provides support for the following chipsets:

-   DEC/Intel 21143

-   ADMtek AL981 Comet, AN985 Centaur, ADM9511 Centaur II and ADM9513
    Centaur II

-   ASIX Electronics AX88140A and AX88141

-   Conexant LANfinity RS7112 (miniPCI)

-   Davicom DM9009, DM9100, DM9102 and DM9102A

-   Lite-On 82c168 and 82c169 PNIC

-   Lite-On/Macronix 82c115 PNIC II

-   Macronix 98713, 98713A, 98715, 98715A, 98715AEC-C, 98725, 98727 and
    98732

-   Xircom X3201 (cardbus only)

The following NICs are known to work with the dc(4) driver at this time:

-   3Com OfficeConnect 10/100B (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Abocom FE2500

-   Accton EN1217 (98715A)

-   Accton EN2242 MiniPCI

-   Adico AE310TX (98715A)

-   Alfa Inc GFC2204 (ASIX AX88140A)

-   Built in 10Mbps only Ethernet on Compaq Presario 7900 series
    desktops (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in DE500-BA on DEC Alpha workstations (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in Sun DMFE 10/100 Mbps Ethernet on Sun Netra X1 and Sun Fire
    V100 (DM9102A, MII)

-   Built in Ethernet on LinkSys EtherFast 10/100 Instant GigaDrive
    (DM9102, MII)

-   CNet Pro110B (ASIX AX88140A)

-   CNet Pro120A (98715A or 98713A) and CNet Pro120B (98715)

-   Compex RL100-TX (98713 or 98713A)

-   D-Link DFE-570TX (21143, MII, quad port)

-   Digital DE500-BA 10/100 (21143, non-MII)

-   ELECOM Laneed LD-CBL/TXA (ADMtek AN985)

-   Hawking CB102 CardBus

-   IBM EtherJet Cardbus Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 Mobile Cardbus (versions that use the X3201 chipset)

-   Jaton XpressNet (Davicom DM9102)

-   Kingston KNE100TX (21143, MII)

-   Kingston KNE110TX (PNIC 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v2.0 (PNIC II 82c115)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v4.0/4.1 (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Matrox FastNIC 10/100 (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   Melco LGY-PCI-TXL

-   Microsoft MN-120 10/100 CardBus (ADMTek Centaur-C)

-   Microsoft MN-130 10/100 PCI (ADMTek Centaur-P)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A (98713A)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A Rev B4 (98715AEC-C)

-   NetGear FA310-TX Rev. D1, D2 or D3 (PNIC 82c169)

-   Netgear FA511

-   PlaneX FNW-3602-T (ADMtek AN985)

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 1233A-TX (ADMtek AN985)

-   SVEC PN102-TX (98713)

-   Xircom Cardbus Realport

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet 10/100

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet II 10/100

Adapters supported by the aue(4) driver include:

-   Abocom UFE1000, DSB650TX_NA

-   Accton USB320-EC, SpeedStream

-   ADMtek AN986, AN8511

-   Billionton USB100, USB100LP, USB100EL, USBE100

-   Corega Ether FEther USB-T, FEther USB-TX, FEther USB-TXS

-   D-Link DSB-650, DSB-650TX, DSB-650TX-PNA

-   Elecom LD-USBL/TX

-   Elsa Microlink USB2Ethernet

-   HP hn210e

-   I-O Data USB ETTX

-   Kingston KNU101TX

-   LinkSys USB10T adapters that contain the AN986 Pegasus chipset,
    USB10TA, USB10TX, USB100TX, USB100H1

-   MELCO LUA-TX, LUA2-TX

-   Planex UE-200TX

-   Sandberg USB to Network Link (model number 133-06)

-   Siemens Speedstream

-   SmartBridges smartNIC

-   SMC 2202USB

-   SOHOware NUB100

The cue(4) driver supports CATC USB-EL1210A based USB Ethernet adapters
including:

-   Belkin F5U011/F5U111

-   CATC Netmate

-   CATC Netmate II

-   SmartBridges SmartLink

The kue(4) driver supports Kawasaki LSI KL5KLUSB101B based USB Ethernet
adapters including:

-   3Com 3c19250

-   3Com 3c460 HomeConnect Ethernet USB Adapter

-   ADS Technologies USB-10BT

-   AOX USB101

-   ATen UC10T

-   Abocom URE 450

-   Corega USB-T

-   D-Link DSB-650C

-   Entrega NET-USB-E45, NET-HUB-3U1E

-   I/O Data USB ETT

-   Kawasaki DU-H3E

-   LinkSys USB10T

-   Netgear EA101

-   Peracom USB Ethernet Adapter

-   SMC 2102USB, 2104USB

The axe(4) driver supports ASIX Electronics AX88172 based USB Ethernet
adapters including:

-   Buffalo (Melco Inc.) LUA-U2-KTX

-   D-Link DUBE100

-   LinkSys USB200M

-   Netgear FA120

-   System TALKS Inc. SGC-X2UL

The rue(4) driver supports RealTek RTL8150 based USB Ethernet adapters
including:

-   Buffalo (Melco Inc.) LUA-KTX

-   Green House GH-USB100B

-   LinkSys USB100M

-   Billionton 10/100 FastEthernet USBKR2

The udav(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Corega FEther USB-TXC

Adapters supported by the de(4) driver include:

-   Adaptec ANA-6944/TX

-   Cogent EM100FX and EM440TX

-   Corega FastEther PCI-TX

-   D-Link DFE-500TX

-   DEC DE435, DE425, DEC DE450, and DEC DE500

-   ELECOM LD-PCI2T, LD-PCITS

-   I-O DATA LA2/T-PCI

-   SMC Etherpower 8432, 9332 and 9334

-   ZNYX ZX3xx

Controllers and cards supported by the fe(4) driver include:

-   Allied Telesis RE1000, RE1000Plus, ME1500 (110-pin)

-   CONTEC C-NET(98)P2, C-NET (9N)E (110-pin), C-NET(9N)C (ExtCard)

-   CONTEC C-NET(PC)C PCMCIA Ethernet

-   Eiger Labs EPX-10BT

-   Fujitsu FMV-J182, FMV-J182A

-   Fujitsu MB86960A, MB86965A

-   Fujitsu MBH10303, MBH10302 Ethernet PCMCIA

-   Fujitsu Towa LA501 Ethernet

-   HITACHI HT-4840-11

-   NextCom J Link NC5310

-   RATOC REX-5588, REX-9822, REX-4886, and REX-R280

-   RATOC REX-9880/9881/9882/9883

-   TDK LAC-98012, LAC-98013, LAC-98025, LAC-9N011 (110-pin)

-   TDK LAK-CD021, LAK-CD021A, LAK-CD021BX

-   Ungermann-Bass Access/PC N98C+(PC85152, PC85142), Access/NOTE
    N98(PC86132) (110-pin)

Adapters supported by the fxp(4) driver include:

-   Intel EtherExpress PRO/10

-   Intel InBusiness 10/100

-   Intel PRO/100B / EtherExpressPRO/100 B PCI Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100+ Management Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 VE Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 M Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 S Desktop, Server and Dual-Port Server Adapters

-   Contec C-NET(PI)-100TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821Ra20, Rv20, Xv13, Xv20 internal 100Base-TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B06 (PC-98)

-   Many on-board network interfaces on Intel motherboards

The ex(4) driver supports the following Ethernet adapters:

-   Intel EtherExpress Pro/10

-   Intel EtherExpress Pro/10+

-   The Olicom OC2220

The ie(4) driver provides supports the following 8 and 16bit ISA
Ethernet cards that are based on the Intel i82586 chip:

-   3COM 3C507

-   AT&T EN100

-   AT&T Starlan 10

-   AT&T Starlan Fiber

-   Intel EtherExpress 16

-   RACAL Interlan NI5210

The ep(4) driver supports Ethernet adapters based on the 3Com 3C5x9
Etherlink III Parallel Tasking chipset, including:

-   3Com 3C1 CF

-   3Com 3C509-TP, 3C509-BNC, 3C509-Combo, 3C509-TPO, 3C509-TPC ISA

-   3Com 3C509B-TP, 3C509B-BNC, 3C509B-Combo, 3C509B-TPO, 3C509B-TPC ISA

-   3Com 3C529, 3C529-TP MCA

-   3Com 3C562/3C563 PCMCIA

-   3Com 3C569B-J-TPO, 3C569B-J-COMBO CBUS

-   3Com 3C574-TX, 3CCFE574BT, 3CXFE574BT, 3C3FE574BT PCMCIA

-   3Com 3C579-TP, 3C579-BNC EISA

-   3Com 3C589, 3C589B, 3C589C, 3C589D, 3CXE589DT PCMCIA

-   3Com 3CCFEM556B, 3CCFEM556BI PCMCIA

-   3Com 3CXE589EC, 3CCE589EC, 3CXE589ET, 3CCE589ET PCMCIA

-   3Com Megahertz 3CCEM556, 3CXEM556, 3CCEM556B, 3CXEM556B PCMCIA

-   3Com OfficeConnect 3CXSH572BT, 3CCSH572BT PCMCIA

-   Farallon EtherMac PCMCIA

The el(4) driver supports the 3Com 3c501 8bit ISA Ethernet card.

The xl(4) driver supports the following hardware:

-   3Com 3c900-TPO

-   3Com 3c900-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905-TX

-   3Com 3c905-T4

-   3Com 3c900B-TPO

-   3Com 3c900B-TPC

-   3Com 3c900B-FL

-   3Com 3c900B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905B-T4

-   3Com 3c905B-TX

-   3Com 3c905B-FX

-   3Com 3c905B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905C-TX

-   3Com 3c980, 3c980B, and 3c980C server adapters

-   3Com 3cSOHO100-TX OfficeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c450 HomeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c555, 3c556 and 3c556B mini-PCI adapters

-   3Com 3C3SH573BT, 3C575TX, 3CCFE575BT, 3CXFE575BT, 3CCFE575CT,
    3CXFE575CT, 3CCFEM656, 3CCFEM656B, and 3CCFEM656C, 3CXFEM656,
    3CXFEM656B, and 3CXFEM656C CardBus adapters

-   3Com 3c905-TX, 3c905B-TX 3c905C-TX, and 3c920B-EMB embedded adapters

Both the 3C656 family of CardBus cards and the 3C556 family of MiniPCI
cards have a built-in proprietary modem. Neither the xl(4) driver nor
any other driver supports this modem.

The vx(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   3Com 3c590 EtherLink III PCI

-   3Com 3c592 EtherLink III EISA

-   3Com 3c595 Fast EtherLink III PCI in 10 Mbps mode

-   3Com 3c597 Fast EtherLink III EISA in 10 Mbps mode

Crystal Semiconductor CS89x0-based NICs (cs(4) driver)

The sn(4) driver supports SMC9xxx based ISA and PCMCIA cards including:

-   3Com Megahertz X-Jack Ethernet PC-Card CC-10BT

The xe(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   Xircom CreditCard Ethernet (PS-CE2-10)

-   Xircom CreditCard Ethernet + Modem 28 (PS-CEM-28)

-   Xircom CreditCard Ethernet + Modem 33 (CEM33)

-   Xircom CreditCard 10/100 (CE3, CE3B)

-   Xircom CreditCard Ethernet 10/100 + Modem 56 (CEM56)

-   Xircom RealPort Ethernet 10 (RE10)

-   Xircom RealPort Ethernet 10/100 (RE100)

-   Xircom RealPort Ethernet 10/100 + Modem 56 (REM56, REM56G)

-   Accton Fast EtherCard-16 (EN2226)

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 PC Card (CPQ-10/100)

-   Intel EtherExpress Pro/100 PC Card Mobile Adapter 16 (Pro/100 M16A)

Other similar devices using the same hardware may also be supported.

Adapters supported by the lge(4) driver include:

-   SMC TigerCard 1000 (SMC9462SX)

-   D-Link DGE-500SX

The txp(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   3Com 3CR990-TX-95

-   3Com 3CR990-TX-97

-   3Com 3cR990B-TXM

-   3Com 3CR990SVR95

-   3Com 3CR990SVR97

-   3Com 3cR990B-SRV

The bge(4) driver provides support for various NICs based on the
Broadcom BCM570x family of Gigabit Ethernet controller chips, including
the following:

-   3Com 3c996-T (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Dell PowerEdge 1750 integrated BCM5704C NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Dell PowerEdge 2550 integrated BCM5700 NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Dell PowerEdge 2650 integrated BCM5703 NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   IBM x235 server integrated BCM5703x NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP ProLiant NC7760 embedded Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP ProLiant NC7770 PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP ProLiant NC7781 embedded PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Netgear GA302T (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   SysKonnect SK-9D21 (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   SysKonnect SK-9D41 (1000baseSX)

The em(4) driver supports Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the Intel
82540, 82541PI, 82542, 82543, 82544, 82546, 82546EB and 82547 controller
chips:

-   Intel PRO/1000 CT Network Connection (82547)

-   Intel PRO/1000 F Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 Gigabit Server Adapter (82542)

-   Intel PRO/1000 GT Desktop Adapter (82541PI)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Dual Port Server Adapter (82546)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Server Adapter (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Server Adapter (LX) (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Desktop Adapter (82540)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Desktop Adapter (82541)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Dual Port Server Adapter (82546)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Quad Port Server Adapter (82546EB)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Server Adapter (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Desktop Adapter (82544)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 XF Server Adapter (82544)

-   Intel PRO/1000 XT Server Adapter (82544)

The gx(4) driver supports Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the Intel
82542 and 82543 controller chips:

-   Intel PRO/1000 Gigabit Server Adapter (82542)

-   Intel PRO/1000 F Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Server Adapter (82543)

The hme(4) driver supports the on-board Ethernet interfaces of many Sun
UltraSPARC workstation and server models. Cards supported by the hme(4)
driver include:

-   Sun PCI SunSwift Adapter

-   Sun SBus SunSwift Adapter ``( hme'' and ``SUNW,hme'')

-   Sun PCI Sun100BaseT Adapter 2.0

-   Sun SBus Sun100BaseT 2.0

-   Sun PCI Quad FastEthernet Controller

-   Sun SBus Quad FastEthernet Controller

The my(4) driver provides support for various NICs based on the Myson
chipset. Supported models include:

-   Myson MTD800 PCI Fast Ethernet chip

-   Myson MTD803 PCI Fast Ethernet chip

-   Myson MTD89X PCI Gigabit Ethernet chip

Broadcom BCM4401 based Fast Ethernet adapters ( bfe(4) driver)

The re(4) driver supports RealTek RTL8139C+, RTL8169, RTL8169S and
RTL8110S based Fast Ethernet and Gigabit Ethernet adapters including:

-   Alloy Computer Products EtherGOLD 1439E 10/100 (8139C+)

-   Compaq Evo N1015v Integrated Ethernet (8139C+)

-   Corega CG-LAPCIGT Gigabit Ethernet (8169S)

-   Gigabyte 7N400 Pro2 Integrated Gigabit Ethernet (8110S)

-   PLANEX COMMUNICATIONS Inc. GN-1200TC (8169S)

-   Xterasys XN-152 10/100/1000 NIC (8169)

The ixgb(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   Intel PRO/10GbE LR Server Adapter

-   Intel PRO/10GbE SR Server Adapter

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.3 FDDI Interfaces

DEC DEFPA PCI ( fpa(4) driver)

DEC DEFEA EISA ( fpa(4) driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.4 ATM Interfaces

Midway-based ATM interfaces (en(4) driver)

FORE Systems, Inc. PCA-200E ATM PCI Adapters (hfa and fatm(4) drivers)

IDT NICStAR 77201/211-based ATM Adapters ( idt(4) driver)

FORE Systems, Inc. HE155 and HE622 ATM interfaces ( hatm(4) driver)

IDT77252-based ATM cards ( patm(4) driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.5 Wireless Network Interfaces

NCR / AT&T / Lucent Technologies WaveLan T1-speed ISA/radio LAN cards
(wl(4) driver)

Lucent Technologies WaveLAN/IEEE 802.11b wireless network adapters and
workalikes using the Lucent Hermes, Intersil PRISM-II, Intersil
PRISM-2.5, Intersil Prism-3, and Symbol Spectrum24 chipsets (wi(4)
driver)

Cisco/Aironet 802.11b wireless adapters (an(4) driver)

Raytheon Raylink 2.4GHz wireless adapters ( ray(4) driver)

Cards supported by the awi(4) driver include:

-   BayStack 650

-   BayStack 660

-   Icom SL-200

-   Melco WLI-PCM

-   NEL SSMagic

-   Netwave AirSurfer Plus

-   Netwave AirSurfer Pro

-   Nokia C020 WLAN

-   Farallon SkyLINE

The original Xircom Netwave AirSurfer is supported by the cnw(4) driver.

Cards supported by the cnw(4) driver include:

-   Xircom CreditCard Netwave

-   NetWave AirSurfer

The following cards are among those supported by the ath(4) driver:

-   Aztech WL830PC

-   D-Link DWL-A650

-   D-Link DWL-AB650

-   D-Link DWL-A520

-   D-Link DWL-AG520

-   D-Link DWL-AG650

-   D-Link DWL-G520B

-   D-Link DWL-G650B

-   Elecom LD-WL54AG

-   Elecom LD-WL54

-   Fujitsu E5454

-   Fujitsu FMV-JW481

-   Fujitsu E5454

-   HP NC4000

-   I/O Data WN-AB

-   I/O Data WN-AG

-   I/O Data WN-A54

-   Linksys WMP55AG

-   Linksys WPC51AB

-   Linksys WPC55AG

-   NEC PA-WL/54AG

-   Netgear WAG311

-   Netgear WAB501

-   Netgear WAG511

-   Netgear WG311

-   Netgear WG311T

-   Netgear WG511T

-   Orinoco 8480

-   Orinoco 8470WD

-   Proxim Skyline 4030

-   Proxim Skyline 4032

-   Samsung SWL-5200N

-   SMC SMC2735W

-   Sony PCWA-C700

-   Sony PCWA-C300S

-   Sony PCWA-C500

-   3Com 3CRPAG175

An up to date list can be found at
http://customerproducts.atheros.com/customerproducts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.6 Miscellaneous Networks

The cx(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   Cronyx Sigma-22, Sigma-24

-   Cronyx Sigma-100

-   Cronyx Sigma-400, Sigma-401, Sigma-404, Sigma-410, Sigma-440

-   Cronyx Sigma-500

-   Cronyx Sigma-703

-   Cronyx Sigma-800, Sigma-801, Sigma-810, Sigma-840

The cp(4) driver supports the following models of Tau-PCI WAN adapters:

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI/R

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-E1

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-G703

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-2E1

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-4E1

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-E3

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-T3

-   Cronyx Tau-PCI-STS1

The ctau(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   Cronyx Tau (RS-232/V.35)

-   Cronyx Tau/R (RS-530/RS-449)

-   Cronyx Tau/E1 (fractional E1)

-   Cronyx Tau/G703 (unframed E1)

Granch SBNI12 point-to-point communications adapters ( sbni(4) driver)

Granch SBNI16 SHDSL modems ( sbsh(4) driver)

The cm(4) driver supports the following card models:

-   SMC90c26

-   SMC90c56

-   SMC90c66 in '56 compatibility mode.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.7 ISDN Interfaces

AcerISDN P10 ISA PnP (experimental)

Asuscom ISDNlink 128K ISA

ASUSCOM P-IN100-ST-D (and other Winbond W6692-based cards)

AVM

-   A1

-   B1 ISA (tested with V2.0)

-   B1 PCI (tested with V4.0)

-   Fritz!Card classic

-   Fritz!Card PnP

-   Fritz!Card PCI

-   Fritz!Card PCI, Version 2

-   T1

Creatix

-   ISDN-S0

-   ISDN-S0 P&P

Compaq Microcom 610 ISDN (Compaq series PSB2222I) ISA PnP

Dr. Neuhaus Niccy Go@ and compatibles

Dynalink IS64PPH and IS64PPH+

Eicon Diehl DIVA 2.0 and 2.02

ELSA

-   ELSA PCC-16

-   QuickStep 1000pro ISA

-   MicroLink ISDN/PCI

-   QuickStep 1000pro PCI

ITK ix1 Micro ( < V.3, non-PnP version )

Sedlbauer Win Speed

Siemens I-Surf 2.0

TELEINT ISDN SPEED No.1 (experimental)

Teles

-   S0/8

-   S0/16

-   S0/16.3

-   S0/16.3 PnP

-   16.3c ISA PnP (experimental)

-   Teles PCI-TJ

Traverse Technologies NETjet-S PCI

USRobotics Sportster ISDN TA intern

Winbond W6692 based PCI cards

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.8 Serial Interfaces

``PC standard'' 8250, 16450, and 16550-based serial ports ( sio(4)
driver)

AST 4 port serial card using shared IRQ

ARNET serial cards (ar(4) driver)

-   ARNET 8 port serial card using shared IRQ

-   ARNET (now Digiboard) Sync 570/i high-speed serial

Boca multi-port serial cards

-   Boca BB1004 4-Port serial card (Modems not supported)

-   Boca IOAT66 6-Port serial card (Modems supported)

-   Boca BB1008 8-Port serial card (Modems not supported)

-   Boca BB2016 16-Port serial card (Modems supported)

Comtrol Rocketport card (rp(4) driver)

Cyclades Cyclom-Y serial board (cy(4) driver)

STB 4 port card using shared IRQ

DigiBoard intelligent serial cards (digi driver)

PCI-Based multi-port serial boards ( puc(4) driver)

-   Actiontech 56K PCI

-   Avlab Technology, PCI IO 2S and PCI IO 4S

-   Comtrol RocketPort 550

-   Decision Computers PCCOM 4-port serial and dual port RS232/422/485

-   Dolphin Peripherals 4025/4035/4036

-   IC Book Labs Dreadnought 16x Lite and Pro

-   Lava Computers 2SP-PCI/DSerial-PCI/Quattro-PCI/Octopus-550

-   Middle Digital, Weasle serial port

-   Moxa Industio CP-114, Smartio C104H-PCI and C168H/PCI

-   NEC PK-UG-X001 and PK-UG-X008

-   Netmos NM9835 PCI-2S-550

-   Oxford Semiconductor OX16PCI954 PCI UART

-   Syba Tech SD-LAB PCI-4S2P-550-ECP

-   SIIG Cyber I/O PCI 16C550/16C650/16C850

-   SIIG Cyber 2P1S PCI 16C550/16C650/16C850

-   SIIG Cyber 2S1P PCI 16C550/16C650/16C850

-   SIIG Cyber 4S PCI 16C550/16C650/16C850

-   SIIG Cyber Serial (Single and Dual) PCI 16C550/16C650/16C850

-   Syba Tech Ltd. PCI-4S2P-550-ECP

-   Titan PCI-200H and PCI-800H

-   US Robotics (3Com) 3CP5609 modem

-   VScom PCI-400 and PCI-800

SDL Communication serial boards

-   SDL Communications Riscom/8 Serial Board (rc driver)

-   SDL Communications RISCom/N2 and N2pci high-speed sync serial boards
    (sr(4) driver)

Specialix SI/XIO/SX multiport serial cards, with both the older
SIHOST2.x and the new ``enhanced'' (transputer based, aka JET) host
cards (ISA, EISA and PCI are supported) (si(4) driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.9 Audio Devices

Advance ( sbc(4) driver)

-   Asound 100 and 110

-   Logic ALS120 and ALS4000

CMedia sound chips

-   CMI8338/CMI8738

Crystal Semiconductor ( csa(4) driver)

-   CS461x/462x Audio Accelerator

-   CS428x Audio Controller

ENSONIQ ( pcm(4) driver)

-   AudioPCI ES1370/1371

The snd_ess(4) driver supports the following soundcards:

-   Ensoniq ESS ISA PnP/non-PnP

ESS

-   ES1868, ES1869, ES1879 and ES1888 ( sbc(4) driver)

-   Maestro-1, Maestro-2, and Maestro-2E

-   Maestro-3/Allegro

      Note: The Maestro-3/Allegro cannot be compiled into the FreeBSD
      kernel due to licensing restrictions. To use this driver, add the
      following line to /boot/loader.conf:

          snd_maestro3_load="YES"

ForteMedia fm801

Gravis ( gusc(4) driver)

-   UltraSound MAX

-   UltraSound PnP

Intel 443MX, 810, 815, and 815E integrated sound devices ( pcm(4)
driver)

MSS/WSS Compatible DSPs ( pcm(4) driver)

NeoMagic 256AV/ZX ( pcm(4) driver)

OPTi 931/82C931 ( pcm(4) driver)

S3 Sonicvibes

Creative Technologies SoundBlaster series ( sbc(4) driver)

-   SoundBlaster

-   SoundBlaster Pro

-   SoundBlaster AWE-32

-   SoundBlaster AWE-64

-   SoundBlaster AWE-64 GOLD

-   SoundBlaster ViBRA-16

Creative Technologies Sound Blaster Live! series (emu10k1 driver)

Trident 4DWave DX/NX ( pcm(4) driver)

VIA Technologies VT82C686A

Yamaha

-   DS1

-   DS1e

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.10 Camera and Video Capture Devices

Brooktree Bt848/849/878/879-based frame grabbers ( bktr(4) driver)

Connectix QuickCam

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.11 USB Devices

A range of USB peripherals are supported; devices known to work are
listed in this section. Owing to the generic nature of most USB devices,
with some exceptions any device of a given class will be supported, even
if not explicitly listed here.

  Note: USB Ethernet adapters can be found in the section listing
  Ethernet interfaces.

  Note: USB Bluetooth adapters can be found in Bluetooth section.

The ohci(4) driver supports all OHCI v1.0 compliant controllers
including:

-   AcerLabs M5237 (Aladdin-V)

-   AMD-756

-   OPTi 82C861 (FireLink)

-   NEC uPD 9210

-   CMD Tech 670 (USB0670)

-   CMD Tech 673 (USB0673)

-   NVIDIA nForce3

The uhci(4) driver supports all UHCI v1.1 compliant controllers
including:

-   Intel 82371AB/EB (PIIX4)

-   Intel 82371SB (PIIX3)

-   VIA 83C572

USB 2.0 controllers using the EHCI interface ( ehci(4) driver)

Hubs

Keyboards ( ukbd(4) driver)

Miscellaneous

-   Assist Computer Systems PC Camera C-M1

-   ActiveWire I/O Board

-   Creative Technology Video Blaster WebCam Plus

-   D-Link DSB-R100 USB Radio ( ufm(4) driver)

-   Mirunet AlphaCam Plus

The following devices are supported by the urio(4) driver:

-   Diamond MultiMedia Rio 500

-   Diamond MultiMedia Rio 600

-   Diamond MultiMedia Rio 800

Devices supported by the umodem(4) driver include:

-   3Com 5605

-   Metricom Ricochet GS USB wireless modem

-   Yamaha Broadband Wireless Router RTW65b

Mice ( ums(4) driver)

The ulpt(4) driver provides support for USB printers and parallel
printer conversion cables, including the following:

-   ATen parallel printer adapter

-   Belkin F5U002 parallel printer adapter

-   Canon BJ F850, S600

-   Canon LBP-1310, 350

-   Entrega USB-to-parallel printer adapter

-   Hewlett-Packard HP Deskjet 3420 (P/N: C8947A #ABJ)

-   Oki Data MICROLINE ML660PS

-   Seiko Epson PM-900C, 880C, 820C, 730C

The ubsa(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Belkin F5U103

-   Belkin F5U120

-   e-Tek Labs Kwik232

-   GoHubs GoCOM232

-   Peracom single port serial adapter

The ubser(4) driver provides support the BWCT console management serial
adapters.

The uftdi(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   HP USB-Serial adapter shipped with some HP laptops

-   Inland UAS111

-   QVS USC-1000

The uplcom(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   ATEN UC-232A

-   BAFO BF-800

-   BAFO BF-810

-   ELECOM UC-SGT

-   HAL Corporation Crossam2+USB IR commander

-   IOGEAR UC-232A

-   I/O DATA USB-RSAQ

-   I/O DATA USB-RSAQ2

-   PLANEX USB-RS232 URS-03

-   RATOC REX-USB60

-   Sandberg USB to Serial Link (model number 133-08)

-   SOURCENEXT KeikaiDenwa 8 (with and without charger)

-   Sony Ericsson USB Cable (Susteen USB Data Cable)

The umct(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Magic Control Technology USB-232

-   Sitecom USB-232

-   D-Link DU-H3SP USB BAY Hub

-   Belkin F5U109

-   Belkin F5U409

The following devices are supported by the uscanner(4) driver:

-   Acer Acerscan 320U

-   Acer Acerscan 620U

-   Acer Acerscan 640U

-   Acer Acerscan C310U

-   AGFA SnapScan 1212U

-   AGFA SnapScan 1236U

-   AGFA SnapScan e20

-   AGFA SnapScan e25

-   AGFA SnapScan e26

-   AGFA SnapScan e40

-   AGFA SnapScan e50

-   AGFA SnapScan e52

-   AGFA SnapScan Touch

-   Avision 1200U

-   Canon CanoScan N656U

-   Canon CanoScan N676U

-   Canon CanoScan N1220U

-   Canon CanoScan LIDE 20

-   Canon CanoScan LIDE 30

-   Epson Perfection 610

-   Epson Perfection 636U / 636Photo

-   Epson Perfection 640U

-   Epson Perfection 1200U / 1200Photo

-   Epson Perfection 1240U / 1240Photo

-   Epson Perfection 1250

-   Epson Perfection 1260

-   Epson Expression 1600

-   Epson Perfection 1640SU

-   Epson Perfection 1650

-   Epson Perfection 1660

-   Epson Perfection 1670

-   Epson Perfection 3200

-   Epson GT-8400UF

-   Epson GT-9300UF

-   Epson GT-9700F

-   Hewlett Packard Photosmart S20

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 2200C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 3300C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 3400CSE

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 4100C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 4200C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 4300C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 5200C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 5300C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 5400C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 6200C

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet 6300C

-   KYE ColorPage Vivid-Pro

-   Microtek Phantom 336CX

-   Microtek Phantom C6

-   Microtek ScanMaker V6UL

-   Microtek ScanMaker V6USL

-   Microtek ScanMaker X6U

-   Minolta 5400

-   Mustek 600 CU

-   Mustek 1200 CU

-   Mustek 1200 UB

-   Mustek 1200 USB

-   Mustek BearPaw 1200F

-   Mustek BearPaw 1200TA

-   NatSemi BearPaw 1200

-   Nikon CoolScan LS40 ED

-   Primax 6200

-   Primax Colorado 1200u

-   Primax Colorado 600u

-   Primax Colorado USB 19200

-   Primax Colorado USB 9600

-   Primax G2-200

-   Primax G2-300

-   Primax G2-600

-   Primax G2600

-   Primax G2E-300

-   Primax G2E-3002

-   Primax G2E-600

-   Primax G2E600

-   Primax G2X-300

-   Primax G600

-   Primax ReadyScan 636i

-   Ultima 1200 UB Plus

-   UMAX Astra 1220U

-   UMAX Astra 1236U

-   UMAX Astra 2000U

-   UMAX Astra 2100U

-   UMAX Astra 2200U

-   UMAX Astra 3400

-   Visioneer OneTouch 3000

-   Visioneer OneTouch 5300

-   Visioneer OneTouch 7600

-   Visioneer OneTouch 6100

-   Visioneer OneTouch 6200

-   Visioneer OneTouch 8100

-   Visioneer OneTouch 8600

Storage ( umass(4) driver)

-   ADTEC Stick Drive AD-UST32M, 64M, 128M, 256M

-   Denno FireWire/USB2 Removable 2.5-inch HDD Case MIFU-25CB20

-   FujiFilm Zip USB Drive ZDR100 USB A

-   GREEN HOUSE USB Flash Memory ``PicoDrive'' GH-UFD32M, 64M, 128M

-   IBM 32MB USB Memory Key (P/N 22P5296)

-   IBM ThinkPad USB Portable CD-ROM Drive (P/N 33L5151)

-   I-O DATA USB x6 CD-RW Drive CDRW-i64/USB (CDROM only)

-   I-O DATA USB CD/CD-R/CD-RW/DVD-R/DVD-RW/DVD-RAM/DVD-ROM Drive
    DVR-iUH2 (CDROM, DVD-RAM only)

-   Iomega USB Zip 100Mb (primitive support still)

-   Iomega Zip750 USB2.0 Drive

-   Keian USB1.1/2.0 3.5-inch HDD Case KU350A

-   Kurouto Shikou USB 2.5-inch HDD Case GAWAP2.5PS-USB2.0

-   Logitec USB1.1/2.0 HDD Unit SHD-E60U2

-   Logitec Mobile USB Memory LMC-256UD

-   Logitec USB Double-Speed Floppy Drive LFD-31U2

-   Logitec USB/IEEE1394 DVD-RAM/R/RW Unit LDR-N21FU2 (CDROM only)

-   Matshita CF-VFDU03 floppy drive

-   MELCO USB2.0 MO Drive MO-CH640U2

-   I-O DATA USB/IEEE1394 Portable HD Drive HDP-i30P/CI, HDP-i40P/CI

-   MELCO USB Flash Disk ``PetitDrive'', RUF-32M, -64M, -128M, -256M

-   MELCO USB2.0 Flash Disk ``PetitDrive2'', RUF-256M/U2, -512M/U2

-   MELCO USB Flash Disk ``ClipDrive'', RUF-C32M, -C64M, -C128M, -C256M,
    -C512M

-   Microtech USB-SCSI-HD 50 USB to SCSI cable

-   NOVAC USB2.0 2.5/3.5-inch HDD Case NV-HD351U

-   Panasonic floppy drive

-   Panasonic USB2.0 Portable CD-RW Drive KXL-RW40AN (CDROM only)

-   RATOC Systems USB2.0 Removable HDD Case U2-MDK1, U2-MDK1B

-   Sony Portable CD-R/RW Drive CRX10U (CDROM only)

-   TEAC Portable USB CD-ROM Unit CD-110PU/210PU

-   Y-E Data floppy drive (720/1.44/2.88Mb)

Audio Devices ( uaudio(4) driver)

The uvisor(4) driver supports the following devices:

-   Handspring Treo

-   Handspring Treo 600

-   Handspring Visor

-   Palm I705

-   Palm M125

-   Palm M130

-   Palm M500

-   Palm M505

-   Palm M515

-   Palm Tungsten T

-   Palm Tungsten Z

-   Palm Zire

-   Palm Zire 31

-   Sony Clie 4.0

-   Sony Clie 4.1

-   Sony Clie 5.0

-   Sony Clie PEG-S500C

-   Sony Clie NX60

-   Sony Clie S360

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.12 IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Devices

The fwohci(4) driver provides support for PCI/CardBus firewire interface
cards. The driver supports the following IEEE 1394 OHCI chipsets:

-   Adaptec AHA-894x/AIC-5800

-   Apple Pangea

-   Apple UniNorth

-   Intel 82372FB

-   Lucent FW322/323

-   NEC uPD72861

-   NEC uPD72870

-   NEC uPD72871/2

-   NEC uPD72873

-   NEC uPD72874

-   National Semiconductor CS4210

-   Ricoh R5C551

-   Ricoh R5C552

-   Sony CX3022

-   Sony i.LINK (CXD1947)

-   Sony i.LINK (CXD3222)

-   Texas Instruments PCI4410A

-   Texas Instruments PCI4450

-   Texas Instruments PCI4451

-   Texas Instruments TSB12LV22

-   Texas Instruments TSB12LV23

-   Texas Instruments TSB12LV26

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AA22

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AB21/A/AI/A-EP

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AB22/A

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AB23

-   Texas Instruments TSB82AA2

-   VIA Fire II (VT6306)

Serial Bus Protocol 2 (SBP-2) storage devices ( sbp(4) driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.13 Bluetooth Devices

PCCARD Host Controllers ( ng_bt3c(4) driver)

-   3Com/HP 3CRWB6096-A PCCARD adapter

The ng_ubt(4) driver supports all Bluetooth USB devices that conform
with the Bluetooth specification v1.1, including:

-   3Com 3CREB96

-   AIPTEK BR0R02

-   EPoX BT-DG02

-   Mitsumi Bluetooth USB adapter

-   MSI MS-6967

-   TDK Bluetooth USB adapter

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.14 Cryptographic Accelerators

The hifn(4) driver supports various cards containing the Hifn 7751,
7951, 7811, 7955, and 7956 chipsets, such as:

-   Invertex AEON

-   Hifn 7751

-   PowerCrypt

-   XL-Crypt

-   NetSec 7751

-   Soekris Engineering vpn1201 and vpn1211

-   Soekris Engineering vpn1401 and vpn1411

The safe(4) driver supports cards containing any of the following chips:

-   SafeNet 1141

-   SafeNet 1741

The ubsec(4) driver supports cards containing any of the following
chips:

-   Bluesteel 5501

-   Bluesteel 5601

-   Broadcom BCM5801

-   Broadcom BCM5802

-   Broadcom BCM5805

-   Broadcom BCM5820

-   Broadcom BCM5821

-   Broadcom BCM5822

-   Broadcom BCM5823

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.15 Miscellaneous

FAX-Modem/PCCARD

-   MELCO IGM-PCM56K/IGM-PCM56KH

-   Nokia Card Phone 2.0 (gsm900/dcs1800 HSCSD terminal)

Floppy drives ( fdc(4) driver)

VGA-compatible video cards ( vga(4) driver)

  Note: Information regarding specific video cards and compatibility
  with XFree86 can be found at http://www.xfree86.org/.

Keyboards including:

-   AT-style keyboards ( atkbd(4) driver)

-   PS/2 keyboards ( atkbd(4) driver)

-   USB keyboards ( ukbd(4) driver)

Pointing devices including:

-   Bus mice and compatible devices ( mse(4) driver)

-   PS/2 mice and compatible devices, including many laptop pointing
    devices ( psm(4) driver)

-   Serial mice and compatible devices

-   USB mice ( ums(4) driver)

  Note: moused(8) has more information on using pointing devices with
  FreeBSD. Information on using pointing devices with XFree86 can be
  found at http://www.xfree86.org/.

``PC standard'' parallel ports ( ppc(4) driver)

PC-compatible joysticks ( joy(4) driver)

PHS Data Communication Card/PCCARD

-   NTT DoCoMo P-in Comp@ct

-   Panasonic KX-PH405

-   SII MC-P200

Xilinx XC6200-based reconfigurable hardware cards compatible with the
HOT1 from Virtual Computers (xrpu driver).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
