[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 2.1.7 Announcement

FreeBSD 2.1.7 is now available in:

  ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/2.1.7-RELEASE

And shortly from its various mirror sites, a list of which may be
obtained from: http://www.FreeBSD.org/handbook/mirrors.html

This is a security release to FreeBSD 2.1.6, fixing at least several
security holes and addressing a number of outstanding problem reports in
that release.

FreeBSD 2.1.7 will also be available on CDROM from Walnut Creek CDROM,
hopefully shipping within the next 3-4 weeks. If you are a customer of
Walnut Creek CDROM and you purchased the 2.1.6 release (either by
subscription or by retail) then you are also entitled to a free upgrade.
All you need to do is send mail to orders@cdrom.com or call 1-800
786-9907 / +1 510 674-0783 Intl, indicate that you would like the free
2.1.7 upgrade and provide your name and address information so that a
replacement can be shipped. Walnut Creek CDROM customers will also
receive a letter explaining these details.

Those puzzled by the near-simultaneous release of 2.1.7 and 2.2 should
also look at http://www.FreeBSD.org/ for the reasons behind this release
schedule. CDROM subscription customers should see this page for
information on Walnut Creek CDROM’s plans for these releases.

If you are a commercial user of FreeBSD who would like to take advantage
of recent bug fixes without making the jump to our more ambitious 2.2
release (or delay that jump until 2.2 has had more time to mature), or
if you’re simply looking for the lowest-impact upgrade from 2.1.5, then
2.1.7-RELEASE is for you.

Release Home

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: February 21, 2021 by Danilo G. Baio

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
