[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/sparc64 5.3-RELEASE Hardware Notes

The FreeBSD Documentation Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 The FreeBSD Documentation
Project

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 Supported Systems

2.1 Fully Supported Systems

2.2 Partially Supported Systems

2.3 Unsupported Systems

3 Supported Devices

3.1 Disk Controllers

3.2 Ethernet Interfaces

3.3 FDDI Interfaces

3.4 ATM Interfaces

3.5 Wireless Network Interfaces

3.6 Miscellaneous Networks

3.7 ISDN Interfaces

3.8 Serial Interfaces

3.9 Audio Devices

3.10 Camera and Video Capture Devices

3.11 USB Devices

3.12 IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Devices

3.13 Bluetooth Devices

3.14 Cryptographic Accelerators

3.15 Miscellaneous

1 Introduction

This document contains the hardware compatibility notes for FreeBSD
5.3-RELEASE on the UltraSPARC hardware platform (also referred to as
FreeBSD/sparc64 5.3-RELEASE). It lists devices known to work on this
platform, as well as some notes on boot-time kernel customization that
may be useful when attempting to configure support for new devices.

  Note: This document includes information specific to the UltraSPARC
  hardware platform. Versions of the hardware compatibility notes for
  other architectures will differ in some details.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Supported Systems

This section describes the systems currently known to be supported by
FreeBSD on the UltraSPARC platform. For background information on the
various hardware designs see the Sun System Handbook.

SMP is supported on all systems with more than 1 processor.

If you have a system that is not listed here, it may not have been
tested with FreeBSD 5.3-RELEASE. We encourage you to try it and send a
note to the FreeBSD SPARC porting mailing list with your results,
including which devices work and which do not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Fully Supported Systems

The following systems are fully supported by FreeBSD.

-   Blade 100

-   Blade 150

-   Enterprise 220R

-   Enterprise 250

-   Enterprise 420R

-   Enterprise 450

-   Fire V100

-   Fire V120

-   Netra t1 105

-   Netra T1 AC200/DC200

-   Netra t 1100

-   Netra t 1120

-   Netra t 1125

-   Netra t 1400/1405

-   Netra 120

-   Netra X1

-   SPARCEngine Ultra AXi

-   SPARCEngine Ultra AXmp

-   Ultra 5

-   Ultra 10

-   Ultra 30

-   Ultra 60

-   Ultra 80

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Partially Supported Systems

The following systems are partially supported by FreeBSD. In particular
the onboard scsi controller in sbus systems is not supported.

-   Enterprise 3500

-   Enterprise 4500

-   Ultra 1 Enterprise (1E for short)

-   Ultra 2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Unsupported Systems

The following systems are not supported by FreeBSD. This may be due to
lack of processor support (UltraSPARC III), due to a quirk in the system
design that makes FreeBSD unstable, or due to lack of support for
sufficient onboard devices to make FreeBSD generally useful.

-   All systems containing UltraSPARC III processor(s).

-   Ultra 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Supported Devices

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/hardware/common/dev.sgml,v
1.227.2.14.2.1 2004/11/03 00:18:51 simon Exp $

This section describes the devices currently known to be supported by
with FreeBSD on the UltraSPARC platform. Other configurations may also
work, but simply have not been tested yet. Feedback, updates, and
corrections to this list are encouraged.

Where possible, the drivers applicable to each device or class of
devices is listed. If the driver in question has a manual page in the
FreeBSD base distribution (most should), it is referenced here.
Information on specific models of supported devices, controllers, etc.
can be found in the manual pages.

  Note: The device lists in this document are being generated
  automatically from FreeBSD manual pages. This means that some devices,
  which are supported by multiple drivers, may appear multiple times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1 Disk Controllers

IDE/ATA controllers ( ata(4) driver)

The ahc(4) driver supports the following SCSI host adapter chips and
SCSI controller cards:

-   Adaptec AIC7770 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7850 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7860 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7870 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7880 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7890 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7891 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7892 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7895 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7896 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7897 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7899 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec 274X(W)

-   Adaptec 274X(T)

-   Adaptec 284X

-   Adaptec 2910

-   Adaptec 2915

-   Adaptec 2920

-   Adaptec 2930C

-   Adaptec 2930U2

-   Adaptec 2940

-   Adaptec 2940J

-   Adaptec 2940N

-   Adaptec 2940U

-   Adaptec 2940AU

-   Adaptec 2940UW

-   Adaptec 2940UW Dual

-   Adaptec 2940UW Pro

-   Adaptec 2940U2W

-   Adaptec 2940U2B

-   Adaptec 2950U2W

-   Adaptec 2950U2B

-   Adaptec 19160B

-   Adaptec 29160B

-   Adaptec 29160N

-   Adaptec 3940

-   Adaptec 3940U

-   Adaptec 3940AU

-   Adaptec 3940UW

-   Adaptec 3940AUW

-   Adaptec 3940U2W

-   Adaptec 3950U2

-   Adaptec 3960

-   Adaptec 39160

-   Adaptec 3985

-   Adaptec 4944UW

-   NEC PC-9821Xt13 (PC-98)

-   NEC RvII26 (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B02L/B09 (PC-98)

-   NEC SV-98/2-B03 (PC-98)

-   Many motherboards with on-board SCSI support

The ahd(4) driver supports the following:

-   Adaptec AIC7901 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7901A host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7902 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec 29320 host adapter

-   Adaptec 39320 host adapter

-   Many motherboards with on-board SCSI support

The amr(4) driver supports the following:

-   AMI MegaRAID 320-1

-   AMI MegaRAID 320-2

-   AMI MegaRAID 320-4X

-   AMI MegaRAID Series 418

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1200 (Series 428)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1300 (Series 434)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1400 (Series 438)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1500 (Series 467)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1600 (Series 471)

-   AMI MegaRAID Elite 1500 (Series 467)

-   AMI MegaRAID Elite 1600 (Series 493)

-   AMI MegaRAID Elite 1650 (Series 4xx)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 100 (Series 466WS)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 200 (Series 466)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 300 (Series 490)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 500 (Series 475)

-   Dell PERC

-   Dell PERC 2/SC

-   Dell PERC 2/DC

-   Dell PERC 3/DCL

-   Dell PERC 3/QC

-   Dell PERC 4/Di

-   HP NetRAID-1/Si

-   HP NetRAID-3/Si (D4943A)

-   HP Embedded NetRAID

The ncr(4) driver provides support for the following NCR/Symbios SCSI
controller chips:

-   53C810

-   53C810A

-   53C815

-   53C820

-   53C825A

-   53C860

-   53C875

-   53C875J

-   53C885

-   53C895

-   53C895A

-   53C896

-   53C1510D

The following add-on boards are known to be supported:

-   I-O DATA SC-98/PCI (PC-98)

-   I-O DATA SC-PCI (PC-98)

The sym(4) driver provides support for the following Symbios/LSI Logic
PCI SCSI controllers:

-   53C810

-   53C810A

-   53C815

-   53C825

-   53C825A

-   53C860

-   53C875

-   53C876

-   53C895

-   53C895A

-   53C896

-   53C897

-   53C1000

-   53C1000R

-   53C1010-33

-   53C1010-66

-   53C1510D

The SCSI controllers supported by sym(4) can be either embedded on a
motherboard, or on one of the following add-on boards:

-   ASUS SC-200, SC-896

-   Data Technology DTC3130 (all variants)

-   DawiControl DC2976UW

-   Diamond FirePort (all)

-   I-O DATA SC-UPCI (PC-98)

-   Logitec LHA-521UA (PC-98)

-   NCR cards (all)

-   Symbios cards (all)

-   Tekram DC390W, 390U, 390F, 390U2B, 390U2W, 390U3D, and 390U3W

-   Tyan S1365

Cards supported by the isp(4) driver include:

-   ISP1000

-   PTI SBS440

-   ISP1020

-   ISP1040

-   PTI SBS450

-   Qlogic 1240

-   Qlogic 1020

-   Qlogic 1040

-   Qlogic 1080

-   Qlogic 1280

-   Qlogic 12160

-   Qlogic 2100

-   Qlogic 2102

-   Qlogic 2200

-   Qlogic 2202

-   Qlogic 2204

-   Qlogic 2300

-   Qlogic 2312

-   PTI SBS470

-   Antares P-0033

The following controllers are supported by the mpt(4) driver:

-   LSI Logic 53c1030 (Dual Ultra320 SCSI)

-   LSI Logic FC909 (1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC909A (Dual 1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC919 (2Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC929 (Dual 2Gb/s Fibre Channel)

The SCSI controller chips supprted by the mpt(4) driver can be found
onboard on many systems including:

-   Dell PowerEdge 1750

-   IBM eServer xSeries 335

With all supported SCSI controllers, full support is provided for
SCSI-I, SCSI-II, and SCSI-III peripherals, including hard disks, optical
disks, tape drives (including DAT, 8mm Exabyte, Mammoth, and DLT),
medium changers, processor target devices and CD-ROM drives. WORM
devices that support CD-ROM commands are supported for read-only access
by the CD-ROM drivers (such as cd(4)). WORM/CD-R/CD-RW writing support
is provided by cdrecord(1), which is a part of the sysutils/cdrtools
port in the Ports Collection.

The following CD-ROM type systems are supported at this time:

-   SCSI interface (also includes ProAudio Spectrum and SoundBlaster
    SCSI) (cd(4))

-   ATAPI IDE interface ( acd(4))

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2 Ethernet Interfaces

Adapters supported by the rl(4) driver include:

-   Accton ``Cheetah'' EN1207D (MPX 5030/5038; RealTek 8139 clone)

-   Allied Telesyn AT2550

-   Allied Telesyn AT2500TX

-   Belkin F5D5000

-   BUFFALO(Melco INC.) LPC-CB-CLX(CardBus)

-   Compaq HNE-300

-   CompUSA no-name 10/100 PCI Ethernet NIC

-   Corega FEther CB-TXD

-   Corega FEtherII CB-TXD

-   D-Link DFE-530TX+

-   D-Link DFE-538TX (same as 530+?)

-   D-Link DFE-690TXD

-   Edimax EP-4103DL CardBus

-   Encore ENL832-TX 10/100 M PCI

-   Farallon NetLINE 10/100 PCI

-   Genius GF100TXR,

-   GigaFast Ethernet EE100-AXP

-   KTX-9130TX 10/100 Fast Ethernet

-   LevelOne FPC-0106TX

-   Longshine LCS-8038TX-R

-   NDC Communications NE100TX-E

-   Netronix Inc. EA-1210 NetEther 10/100

-   Nortel Networks 10/100BaseTX

-   OvisLink LEF-8129TX

-   OvisLink LEF-8139TX

-   Peppercon AG ROL-F

-   Planex FNW-3800-TX

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 PCI 1211-TX

-   SOHO(PRAGMATIC) UE-1211C

The dc(4) driver provides support for the following chipsets:

-   DEC/Intel 21143

-   ADMtek AL981 Comet, AN985 Centaur, ADM9511 Centaur II and ADM9513
    Centaur II

-   ASIX Electronics AX88140A and AX88141

-   Conexant LANfinity RS7112 (miniPCI)

-   Davicom DM9009, DM9100, DM9102 and DM9102A

-   Lite-On 82c168 and 82c169 PNIC

-   Lite-On/Macronix 82c115 PNIC II

-   Macronix 98713, 98713A, 98715, 98715A, 98715AEC-C, 98725, 98727 and
    98732

-   Xircom X3201 (cardbus only)

The following NICs are known to work with the dc(4) driver at this time:

-   3Com OfficeConnect 10/100B (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Abocom FE2500

-   Accton EN1217 (98715A)

-   Accton EN2242 MiniPCI

-   Adico AE310TX (98715A)

-   Alfa Inc GFC2204 (ASIX AX88140A)

-   Built in 10Mbps only Ethernet on Compaq Presario 7900 series
    desktops (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in DE500-BA on DEC Alpha workstations (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in Sun DMFE 10/100 Mbps Ethernet on Sun Netra X1 and Sun Fire
    V100 (DM9102A, MII)

-   Built in Ethernet on LinkSys EtherFast 10/100 Instant GigaDrive
    (DM9102, MII)

-   CNet Pro110B (ASIX AX88140A)

-   CNet Pro120A (98715A or 98713A) and CNet Pro120B (98715)

-   Compex RL100-TX (98713 or 98713A)

-   D-Link DFE-570TX (21143, MII, quad port)

-   Digital DE500-BA 10/100 (21143, non-MII)

-   ELECOM Laneed LD-CBL/TXA (ADMtek AN985)

-   Hawking CB102 CardBus

-   IBM EtherJet Cardbus Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 Mobile Cardbus (versions that use the X3201 chipset)

-   Jaton XpressNet (Davicom DM9102)

-   Kingston KNE100TX (21143, MII)

-   Kingston KNE110TX (PNIC 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v2.0 (PNIC II 82c115)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v4.0/4.1 (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Matrox FastNIC 10/100 (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   Melco LGY-PCI-TXL

-   Microsoft MN-120 10/100 CardBus (ADMTek Centaur-C)

-   Microsoft MN-130 10/100 PCI (ADMTek Centaur-P)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A (98713A)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A Rev B4 (98715AEC-C)

-   NetGear FA310-TX Rev. D1, D2 or D3 (PNIC 82c169)

-   Netgear FA511

-   PlaneX FNW-3602-T (ADMtek AN985)

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 1233A-TX (ADMtek AN985)

-   SVEC PN102-TX (98713)

-   Xircom Cardbus Realport

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet 10/100

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet II 10/100

Adapters supported by the fxp(4) driver include:

-   Intel EtherExpress PRO/10

-   Intel InBusiness 10/100

-   Intel PRO/100B / EtherExpressPRO/100 B PCI Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100+ Management Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 VE Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 M Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 S Desktop, Server and Dual-Port Server Adapters

-   Contec C-NET(PI)-100TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821Ra20, Rv20, Xv13, Xv20 internal 100Base-TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B06 (PC-98)

-   Many on-board network interfaces on Intel motherboards

The xl(4) driver supports the following hardware:

-   3Com 3c900-TPO

-   3Com 3c900-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905-TX

-   3Com 3c905-T4

-   3Com 3c900B-TPO

-   3Com 3c900B-TPC

-   3Com 3c900B-FL

-   3Com 3c900B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905B-T4

-   3Com 3c905B-TX

-   3Com 3c905B-FX

-   3Com 3c905B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905C-TX

-   3Com 3c980, 3c980B, and 3c980C server adapters

-   3Com 3cSOHO100-TX OfficeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c450 HomeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c555, 3c556 and 3c556B mini-PCI adapters

-   3Com 3C3SH573BT, 3C575TX, 3CCFE575BT, 3CXFE575BT, 3CCFE575CT,
    3CXFE575CT, 3CCFEM656, 3CCFEM656B, and 3CCFEM656C, 3CXFEM656,
    3CXFEM656B, and 3CXFEM656C CardBus adapters

-   3Com 3c905-TX, 3c905B-TX 3c905C-TX, and 3c920B-EMB embedded adapters

Both the 3C656 family of CardBus cards and the 3C556 family of MiniPCI
cards have a built-in proprietary modem. Neither the xl(4) driver nor
any other driver supports this modem.

The hme(4) driver supports the on-board Ethernet interfaces of many Sun
UltraSPARC workstation and server models. Cards supported by the hme(4)
driver include:

-   Sun PCI SunSwift Adapter

-   Sun SBus SunSwift Adapter ``( hme'' and ``SUNW,hme'')

-   Sun PCI Sun100BaseT Adapter 2.0

-   Sun SBus Sun100BaseT 2.0

-   Sun PCI Quad FastEthernet Controller

-   Sun SBus Quad FastEthernet Controller

Cards supported by gem(4) driver include:

-   Sun GEM gigabit Ethernet

-   Sun ERI 10/100 Mbps Ethernet

-   Apple GMAC

The re(4) driver supports RealTek RTL8139C+, RTL8169, RTL8169S and
RTL8110S based Fast Ethernet and Gigabit Ethernet adapters including:

-   Alloy Computer Products EtherGOLD 1439E 10/100 (8139C+)

-   Compaq Evo N1015v Integrated Ethernet (8139C+)

-   Corega CG-LAPCIGT Gigabit Ethernet (8169S)

-   Gigabyte 7N400 Pro2 Integrated Gigabit Ethernet (8110S)

-   PLANEX COMMUNICATIONS Inc. GN-1200TC (8169S)

-   Xterasys XN-152 10/100/1000 NIC (8169)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.3 FDDI Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.4 ATM Interfaces

FORE Systems, Inc. PCA-200E ATM PCI Adapters (hfa and fatm(4) drivers)

FORE Systems, Inc. HE155 and HE622 ATM interfaces ( hatm(4) driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.5 Wireless Network Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.6 Miscellaneous Networks

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.7 ISDN Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.8 Serial Interfaces

Serial ports based on the SAB82532 serial chip, console only ( sab(4)
driver)

Serial ports based on the Zilog 8530 dual uart, console only (zs driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.9 Audio Devices

The snd_ess(4) driver supports the following soundcards:

-   Ensoniq ESS ISA PnP/non-PnP

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.10 Camera and Video Capture Devices

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.11 USB Devices

The umct(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Magic Control Technology USB-232

-   Sitecom USB-232

-   D-Link DU-H3SP USB BAY Hub

-   Belkin F5U109

-   Belkin F5U409

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.12 IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Devices

The fwohci(4) driver provides support for PCI/CardBus firewire interface
cards. The driver supports the following IEEE 1394 OHCI chipsets:

-   Adaptec AHA-894x/AIC-5800

-   Apple Pangea

-   Apple UniNorth

-   Intel 82372FB

-   Lucent FW322/323

-   NEC uPD72861

-   NEC uPD72870

-   NEC uPD72871/2

-   NEC uPD72873

-   NEC uPD72874

-   National Semiconductor CS4210

-   Ricoh R5C551

-   Ricoh R5C552

-   Sony CX3022

-   Sony i.LINK (CXD1947)

-   Sony i.LINK (CXD3222)

-   Texas Instruments PCI4410A

-   Texas Instruments PCI4450

-   Texas Instruments PCI4451

-   Texas Instruments TSB12LV22

-   Texas Instruments TSB12LV23

-   Texas Instruments TSB12LV26

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AA22

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AB21/A/AI/A-EP

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AB22/A

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AB23

-   Texas Instruments TSB82AA2

-   VIA Fire II (VT6306)

Serial Bus Protocol 2 (SBP-2) storage devices ( sbp(4) driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.13 Bluetooth Devices

The ng_ubt(4) driver supports all Bluetooth USB devices that conform
with the Bluetooth specification v1.1, including:

-   3Com 3CREB96

-   AIPTEK BR0R02

-   EPoX BT-DG02

-   Mitsumi Bluetooth USB adapter

-   MSI MS-6967

-   TDK Bluetooth USB adapter

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.14 Cryptographic Accelerators

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.15 Miscellaneous

OpenFirmware console (ofwcons driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
