[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Intel Wireless driver support

Links:
iwlwifi status FreeBSD wiki page URL:
https://wiki.freebsd.org/WiFi/Iwlwifi

The Intel Wireless driver update project aims to bring support for newer
chipsets along with mac80211 LinuxKPI compat code. The dual-licensed
Intel driver code was ported in the past for the iwm(4) native driver
and using the LinuxKPI compat framework allows us to use the driver
directly with only very minor modifications. Multiple updates during
development in the last year have shown that pulling in newer versions
can be done in under 1-2 hours.

After a break, part-time work resumed and the last LinuxKPI conflicts
got resolved and most of the other LinuxKPI changes were committed to
FreeBSD main.

During the update process firmware crashes were unxpectedly encountered
which got solved and the 802.11 compat code improved. The iwlwifi driver
and firmware got updated from the iwlwifi-next git branch and the
linux-firmware repository.

Integration into FreeBSD main is pending for a policy reason. For the
latest state of the development or code, please follow the referenced
wiki page or the freebsd-wireless mailing list.

I would love to thank everyone who has reviewed changes, did initial
testing, helped with drm-kmod, helped in various other ways, answered
questions, encouraged, or patiently waited for any results or running
code.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: July 24, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
