[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

FreshPorts

Links:
FreshPorts URL:https://freshports.org/
FreshPorts blog URL: https://news.freshports.org/

Contact: Dan Langille <dvl@FreeBSD.org>

FreshPorts, and its sister site, FreshSource, have reported upon FreeBSD
commits for 20 years. They cover all commits, but its primary focus is
ports.

FreshPorts tracks the commits and extracts data from the port Makefiles
to create a database of information useful to both port developers and
port users.

For example, https://www.freshports.org/security/acme.sh/ shows the
history of this port, back to its creation in May 2017.

git

The transition from subversion to git went superbly. Now the work is
concentrating on branches. We are close to incorporating all branches
(on src, doc, and ports) into the website.

The website now queries the main repo every three minutes and pulls in
updates. Commit processing under git is faster and more reliable.
Creating the XML directly from git and not from parsing commit emails
has its benefits.

Help wanted

Since the last report, Jethro Nederhof has been doing fantastic work
bringing the website up to HTML5 and into the modern world. Nothing
dramatic, from what the users see, as it has been mostly
behind-the-scenes.

We can always use more helpers. The website mostly runs itself and
requires very little on-going maintenance (pkg upgrades, OS patches,
etc). Most of the work is designing new features, fixing bugs,
identifying issues, and discussion with users. Changes to the ports tree
usually don’t affect the website much.

Tasks include:

-   There is a long list of issues for the website.

-   The git_proc_commit project also has a set of issues, mostly in
    Python, some perhaps related to the website.

-   Documentation outlining how the various projects fit together and
    how they work is required.

-   I have some subversion repos which should be converted to git and
    uploaded to GitHub. This would allow people to work on the backend
    code (commit ingress and processing).

-   The FreshSource website could be updated to modern standards and the
    repo converted to git.

Thank you

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: September 19, 2021 by Brad Davis

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
