[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 5.4 Errata Processing Policy

Introduction

The following is the general policy for submitting requests to have
Errata Fixes applied to FreeBSD 5.4.

Procedures

The Errata fixes will be applied by a member of the Release Engineering
Team, coordinating the fix with the Security Officer who owns the
branch. An Errata Notice will also be issued. The Release Engineering
Team may choose to handle several Errata with one Errata Notice if
several are being processed at roughly the same time.

Policy

Errata Candidates

The classification of things that are Errata candidates are things that
are severe service-disrupting bugs for which there is no known
work-around. Things like bugs in device drivers that impair their
expected functionality, things that can cause kernel panics, etc.

Initial Patch

During the initial phases the fix for Errata should be handled exactly
like any other fix. It should initially be committed to HEAD and go
through the normal testing period there. The fix should then be MFCed as
usual. At this point if you feel a fix is an Errata Notice candidate
please contact the Release Engineering Team to make them aware of it.

The fix should then sit in RELENG_5 for one to two weeks. During this
period please try to have the fix reviewed by another senior Developer
familiar with the section of the code you are working with. You should
also get confirmation that the fix solves the problem from someone who
had reported the problem. Assuming no problems come up during this
testing period then send in the formal request to re@FreeBSD.org. Please
include the patch that will need to be applied to 5.4 and who has
reviewed the fix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
