[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Another milestone for biology ports

Links:
Biolibc-tools URL: https://github.com/auerlab/biolibc-tools
Fast And Simple Differential Analysis URL:
https://github.com/auerlab/fasda

Contact: Jason Bacon <jwb@FreeBSD.org>

The biology category in ports continues to grow and mature, and reached
another milestone in 2022q4 with the introduction of the rna-seq
metaport.

The fields of genomics, and more generally, bioinformatics, are often
referred to as the "wild west" of computational science. Analyses are
typically mired by a lack of clear documentation, and difficulties
deploying and using software. Many scientific software developers do not
understand the potential of package managers to simplify their lives and
the lives of their users. As a result, much scientific software is
deployed using ad hoc "caveman" installations involving overly
complicated and unreliable build systems that either bundle dependencies
or attempt to work with random installations thereof.

Work has been ongoing to make FreeBSD ports a model of how easy
scientific software deployment should be. It now contains a solid core
of many of the most commonly used open source applications in biological
research.

This quarter saw the completion of a tool chain for one of the most
important types of analysis, known as RNA-Seq. RNA-Seq measures the
abundance of RNA, and hence gene activity, in tissue samples. All of the
tools needed to perform a typical RNA-Seq analysis can now be installed
on FreeBSD using:

pkg install rna-seq

This includes many mature existing tools as well as new tools developed
on FreeBSD, such as FASDA and biolibc-tools, easy-to-use replacements
for some of the more troublesome tools traditionally used in an RNA-Seq
pipeline.

Software deployments for RNA-Seq that traditionally have taken weeks or
longer can now be performed on FreeBSD in a few minutes with a single
command. Scientists can spend their time doing science rather than
struggling with IT issues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: January 23, 2023 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
