[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 7.2-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2008, 2009 The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: stable/7/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml
193687 2009-06-08 05:11:35Z hrs $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “®” symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 7.2-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release or too late in
  the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
  documentation. This information includes security advisories, as well
  as news relating to the software or documentation that could affect
  its operation or usability. An up-to-date version of this document
  should always be consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 7.2-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 7.3-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains “late-breaking news” about FreeBSD
7.2-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the “current errata” for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 7-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

No advisories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Open Issues

[20090501] Some machines do not recognize the i386 disc1 as bootable and
fall through to booting off the next boot device. All affected machines
did see the other discs as bootable. As a workaround, you can boot using
the bootonly or livefs CDROM and then swap in disc1 once sysinstall(8)
starts.

[20090504] A lock handling error has been found in interaction between
malloc(3) implementation and threading library. When a multi-threaded
process calls the fork(2) system call in a thread and the malloc(3)
function in another thread, it can cause a deadlock in the child
process. An Errata Notice to fix this problem is planned after the
release.

[20090505] A bug was found in the bce(4) driver. This prevents it from
working with the lagg(4) driver in the LACP (IEEE 802.3ad Link
Aggregation Control Protocol) mode. An Errata Notice to fix this problem
is planned after the release.

[20090507] A bug was found in the fxp(4) driver. This would cause poor
TCP performance when TSO is enabled, and the receiver has a smaller MSS
than the interface MTU setting. To workaround this issue, one can
disable TSO by using ifconfig(8) -tso parameter (per interface basis) or
setting net.inet.tcp.tso to 0 (globally on the system). An Errata Notice
to fix this problem is planned after the release.

[20090608] An issue was found in the bge(4) driver that it can cause a
system panic upon reboot with heavy network traffic. A fix has been
committed to RELENG_7 (r192127).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Late-Breaking News and Corrections

[20090504] A patch to solve the locking issue in the malloc(3)
implementation and threading library has been committed to the RELENG_7
branch for public testing.

[20090507] A patch to solve the bug in the fxp(4) driver that caused
poor TCP performance has been committed to the RELENG_7 branch for
public testing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://www.FreeBSD.org/snapshots/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 7-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
