[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Medium-sized superpages on arm64 and beyond

Contact: Eliot H. Solomon <ehs3@rice.edu>
Contact: Alan L. Cox <alc@rice.edu>

The 64-bit ARM architecture’s page table descriptor format contains a
flag called the Contiguous bit. This tells the MMU that it can cache an
aligned, physically contiguous group of 16 page table entries which have
identical permissions and attributes using only 1 TLB entry.

The Contiguous bit, as well as the conceptually similar Svnapot
extension to the RISC-V architecture, allows for the use of 64 KiB
superpages. These medium-sized superpages can bring to smaller memory
objects the address-translation speedup typically associated with more
traditional 2 MiB superpages.

This project focuses on bringing support for medium-sized superpages to
FreeBSD. So far, we have modified the arm64 pmap code to automatically
utilize 64 KiB superpages by detecting physically contiguous page table
entries and promoting them using the Contiguous bit. Now, we are working
to adapt the kernel’s superpage reservation module to support 64 KiB
reservations in addition to the current 2 MiB ones. Adding medium-sized
reservations will allow the virtual memory system to explicitly allocate
pieces of memory which fit the requirements for superpage promotion,
rather than just hoping that they occur by chance.

Our goal is to accomplish this in a general way that makes it possible
to specify multiple arbitrary power-of-two reservation sizes, making it
easier to take advantage of hardware features on other architectures
like Ryzen’s PTE Coalescing, which transparently merges groups of 4 KiB
page table entries into medium-sized superpages.

Sponsor: Department of Computer Science, Rice University

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: August 2, 2022 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
