[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Intel Wireless driver support

Links:
iwlwifi status FreeBSD wiki page URL:
https://wiki.freebsd.org/WiFi/Iwlwifi

Contact: Bjoern A. Zeeb <bz@FreeBSD.ORG>

The Intel Wireless driver update project aims to bring support for newer
chipsets along with mac80211 LinuxKPI compat code. The dual-licensed
Intel driver code was ported in the past for the iwm(4) native driver;
using the LinuxKPI compat framework allows us to use the driver
directly, with only very minor modifications that we hope will be
incorporated into the original driver.

During December the driver, firmware, and all remaining LinuxKPI
compatibility code were committed to FreeBSD main (HEAD) and merged to
the stable/13 branch. Further fixes, updates, and improvements will go
directly into FreeBSD, meaning the need to apply snapshots is gone and
changes can be distributed more timely.

During the last months we tried to ensure that the latest AX210 chipsets
are supported. The compat code was restructured both to be able to
better trace and debug the mac80211 compatibility layer, but also to
keep the net80211 and mac80211 state machines for stations better in
sync.

While we keep updating the driver and all the compat code needed for
that, the focus remains on stability and adding support for newer 802.11
standards. The driver is still set to 11a/b/g-only and 11n will be next
before we look at 11ac.

With the code in FreeBSD git we anticipate broader testing and with that
also some fallout. For the latest state of the development, please
follow the referenced wiki page and the freebsd-wireless mailing list.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: March 10, 2022 by Joseph Mingrone

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
