[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

FreshPorts - help wanted

Links:
FreshPorts URL: https://freshports.org/
FreshPorts blog URL: https://news.freshports.org/

Contact: Dan Langille <dvl@FreeBSD.org>

FreshPorts and FreshSource have reported upon FreeBSD commits for 20
years. They cover all commits, not just ports.

FreshPorts tracks the commits and extracts data from the port Makefiles
to create a database of information useful to both port maintainers and
port users.

For example, https://www.freshports.org/security/acme.sh/ shows the
history of the acme.sh port, back to its creation in May 2017.

Converting the backend repository

This topic deals with the FreshPorts code repository. The front end
(website) was converted from Subversion to Git several years ago. The
back end, which processes FreeBSD commits and updates the database, is
still on Subversion. I have wanted to convert these repositories to Git
for some time.

I would like help with this please. I’ll give you a copy of the
repositories and you give me back several Git repos (one for each). They
will be uploaded to https://github.com/FreshPorts (our project on
GitHub).

These are the existing Subversion repos:

-   ingress (code for the back end)

-   database schema

-   backend - monitoring code

-   packaging - scripts for cutting new tarballs - deprecated via Git

-   daemontools - now misnamed, because the scripts use daemon(8)

-   periodics - scripts started by periodic(8)

-   ports - for the FreeBSD packages which install the above.

I won’t be running FreshPorts forever

It’s been over 22 years and I know others must take over eventually. I’d
like to start that process now. There are several aspects to FreshPorts:

-   FreeBSD admin (updating the OS and packages)

-   front end code (website - mostly PHP)

-   back end code (commit processing - Perl, Python, shell)

-   database design (PostgreSQL).

The database does not change very often and requires little maintenance
compared to the applications and OS. The website pretty much runs
itself. From time to time, a change to the FreeBSD ports infrastructure
breaks something or requires a modification, but there is rarely any
urgency to fix that. This is not a huge time commitment. There is a lot
of learning. While not a complex application, FreshPorts is also not
trivial.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: January 23, 2023 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
