éÎÆÏÒÍÁÃÉÑ Ï ÏÂÏÒÕÄÏ×ÁÎÉÉ FreeBSD/alpha 5.4-RELEASE

ðÒÏÅËÔ ÄÏËÕÍÅÎÔÉÒÏ×ÁÎÉÑ FreeBSD

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005 ðÒÏÅËÔ ÄÏËÕÍÅÎÔÉÒÏ×ÁÎÉÑ
FreeBSD

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

óÏÄÅÒÖÁÎÉÅ

1. ÷×ÅÄÅÎÉÅ

2. Supported processors and motherboards

2.1. Overview

2.2. In general, what do you need to run FreeBSD on an Alpha?

2.3. System-specific information

2.3.1. AXPpci33 (``NoName'')

2.3.2. Universal Desktop Box (UDB or ``Multia'')

2.3.3. Personal Workstation (``Miata'')

2.3.4. Evaluation Board 64 family

2.3.5. Evaluation Board 164 (``EB164, PC164, PC164LX, PC164SX'') family

2.3.6. AlphaStation 200 (``Mustang'') and 400 (``Avanti'') series

2.3.7. AlphaStation 500 and 600 (``Alcor'' & ``Maverick'' for EV5,
``Bret'' for EV56)

2.3.8. AlphaServer 1000 (``Mikasa''), 1000A (``Noritake'') and
800(``Corelle'')

2.3.9. DS10/VS10/XP900 (``Webbrick'') / XP1000 (``Monet'') / DS10L
(``Slate'')

2.3.10. DS20/DS20E (``Goldrush'')

2.3.11. AlphaPC 264DP / UP2000

2.3.12. AlphaServer 2000 (``DemiSable''), 2100 (``Sable''), 2100A
(``Lynx'')

2.3.13. AlphaServer 4x00 (``Rawhide'')

2.3.14. AlphaServer 1200 (``Tincup'') and AlphaStation 1200
(``DaVinci'')

2.3.15. AlphaServer 8200 and 8400 (``TurboLaser'')

2.3.16. Alpha Processor Inc. UP1000

2.3.17. Alpha Processor Inc. UP1100

2.3.18. Alpha Processor Inc. CS20, Compaq DS20L

2.3.19. Compaq AlphaServer ES40 (``Clipper'')

2.4. Supported Hardware Overview

2.5. Acknowledgments

3. ðÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

3.1. ëÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ ÄÉÓËÏ×

3.2. Ethernet ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

3.3. Token Ring ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

3.4. FDDI ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

3.5. ATM ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

3.6. âÅÓÐÒÏ×ÏÄÎÙÅ ÓÅÔÅ×ÙÅ ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

3.7. òÁÚÌÉÞÎÙÅ ÓÅÔÅ×ÙÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

3.8. ISDN ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

3.9. ðÏÓÌÅÄÏ×ÁÔÅÌØÎÙÅ ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

3.10. áÕÄÉÏ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

3.11. ëÁÍÅÒÙ É ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á ×ÉÄÅÏÚÁÈ×ÁÔÁ

3.12. õÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á USB

3.13. IEEE 1394 (Firewire) ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

3.14. Bluetooth ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

3.15. ëÒÉÐÔÏÇÒÁÆÉÞÅÓËÉÅ ÁËÓÅÌÅÒÁÔÏÒÙ

3.16. äÒÕÇÉÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

1. ÷×ÅÄÅÎÉÅ

÷ ÜÔÏÍ ÄÏËÕÍÅÎÔÅ ÎÁÈÏÄÉÔÓÑ ÉÎÆÏÒÍÁÃÉÑ ÏÂ ÁÐÐÁÒÁÔÎÏÊ ÓÏ×ÍÅÓÔÉÍÏÓÔÉ ÄÌÑ
FreeBSD 5.4-RELEASE ÎÁ ÁÐÐÁÒÁÔÎÏÊ ÐÌÁÔÆÏÒÍÅ Alpha/AXP ÕÐÏÍÉÎÁÅÍÏÊ ÔÁËÖÅ
ËÁË FreeBSD/alpha 5.4-RELEASE). ÷ ÜÔÏÍ ÓÐÉÓËÅ ÎÁÈÏÄÑÔÓÑ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á,
ÒÁÂÏÔÁÀÝÉÅ ÎÁ ÄÁÎÎÏÊ ÐÌÁÔÆÏÒÍÅ, Á ÔÁËÖÅ ÉÎÆÏÒÍÁÃÉÑ ÏÂ ÏÔÄÅÌØÎÙÈ
ÎÁÓÔÒÏÊËÁÈ ÚÁÇÒÕÚËÉ ÑÄÒÁ, ËÏÔÏÒÙÅ ÍÏÇÕÔ ÂÙÔØ ÐÏÌÅÚÎÙ ÐÒÉ ×ËÌÀÞÅÎÉÉ
ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖËÉ ÎÏ×ÙÈ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×.

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: ÷ ÜÔÏÔ ÄÏËÕÍÅÎÔ ×ËÌÀÞÅÎÁ ÉÎÆÏÒÍÁÃÉÑ, ÓÐÅÃÉÆÉÞÎÁÑ ÄÌÑ
  ÁÐÐÁÒÁÔÎÏÊ ÐÌÁÔÆÏÒÍÙ Alpha/AXP. ÷ÅÒÓÉÉ ÉÎÆÏÒÍÁÃÉÉ ÏÂ ÏÂÏÒÕÄÏ×ÁÎÉÉ ÄÌÑ
  ÄÒÕÇÉÈ ÁÒÈÉÔÅËÔÕÒ ÂÕÄÕÔ ÏÔÌÉÞÁÔØÓÑ × ÎÅËÏÔÏÒÙÈ ÄÅÔÁÌÑÈ.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2. Supported processors and motherboards

Maintained by Wilko Bulte.

Additions, corrections and constructive criticism are invited. In
particular, information on system quirks is more than welcome.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1. Overview

This document tries to provide a starting point for those who want to
run FreeBSD on an Alpha-based machine. It is aimed at providing
background information on the various hardware designs. It is not a
replacement for the systems manuals.

The information is structured as follows:

-   general hardware requirements to run FreeBSD on alpha;

-   system specific information for each of the systems/boards supported
    by FreeBSD;

-   information on expansion boards for FreeBSD, including things that
    differ from what is in the generic supported hardware list.

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: You will see references to DEC, Digital Equipment
  Corporation and Compaq used more or less interchangeably. Now that
  Compaq has acquired Digital Equipment it would be more correct to
  refer to Compaq only. To be completely politically correct given that
  Hewlett Packard in turn has acquired Compaq I probably should be using
  HP everywhere. Given the fact that you will see the mix of names
  everywhere, I don't bother.

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: SRM commands will be in UPPER CASE. Lower case input is
  also acceptable to SRM. Upper case is used for clarity.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.2. In general, what do you need to run FreeBSD on an Alpha?

Obviously you will need an Alpha machine that FreeBSD knows about. Alpha
machines are NOT like PCs. There are considerable differences between
the various core logic chip sets and mainboard designs. This means that
a kernel needs to know the intimate details of a particular machine
before it can run on it. Throwing some odd GENERIC kernel at unknown
hardware is almost guaranteed to fail miserably.

For a machine even to be considered for FreeBSD use please make sure it
has the SRM console firmware installed. Or at least make sure that SRM
console firmware is available for the particular machine type. If
FreeBSD does not currently support your machine type, there is a good
chance that this will change at some point in time, assuming SRM is
available. All bets are off when SRM console firmware is not available.

Machines with the ARC or AlphaBIOS console firmware were intended for
WindowsNT. Some have SRM console firmware available in the system ROMs
which you only have to select (via an ARC or AlphaBIOS menu). In other
cases you will have to re-flash the ROMs with SRM code. Check on
http://ftp.digital.com/pub/DEC/Alpha/firmware to see what is available
for your particular system. In any case: no SRM means no FreeBSD (or
NetBSD, OpenBSD, Tru64 Unix or OpenVMS for that matter). With the demise
of WindowsNT/alpha a lot of former NT boxes are sold on the second hand
market. They have little or no trade-in value when they are NT-only from
the console firmware perspective. So, be suspicious if the price appears
too good.

Known non-SRM machines are:

-   Digital XL series

-   Digital XLT series

-   Samsung PC164UX (``Ruffian'')

-   Samsung 164B

Machines that have SRM but are not supported by FreeBSD are:

-   DECpc 150 (``Jensen'')

-   DEC 2000/300 (``Jensen'')

-   DEC 2000/500 (``Culzean'')

-   AXPvme series (``Medulla'')

To complicate things a bit further: Digital used to have so called
``white-box'' Alpha machines destined as NT-only and ``blue-box'' Alpha
machines destined for OpenVMS and Digital Unix. These names are based on
the color of the cabinets, ``FrostWhite'' and ``TopGunBlue''
respectively. Although you could put the SRM console firmware on a
whitebox, OpenVMS and Digital Unix will refuse to boot on them. FreeBSD
in post-4.0-RELEASE will run on both the white and the blue-box
variants. Before someone asks: the white ones had a rather different
(read: cheaper) Digital price tag.

As part of the SRM you will get the so called OSF/1 PAL code (OSF/1
being the initial name of Digital's UNIX offering on Alpha). The PAL
code can be thought of as a software abstraction layer between the
hardware and the operating system. It uses normal CPU instruction plus a
handful of privileged instructions specific for PAL use. PAL is not
microcode. The ARC console firmware contains a different PAL code,
geared towards WinNT and in no way suitable for use by FreeBSD (or more
generic: Unix or OpenVMS). Before someone asks: Linux/alpha brings its
own PAL code, allowing it to boot on ARC and AlphaBIOS. There are
various reasons why this is not a very good idea in the eyes of the *BSD
folks. I don't want to go into details here. If you are interested in
the gory details search the FreeBSD and NetBSD web sites.

There is another pitfall ahead: you will need a disk adapter that the
SRM console firmware recognizes in order to be able to boot from a disk.
What is acceptable to SRM as a boot adapter is unfortunately highly
system and SRM version dependent. For older PCI based machines it means
you will need either a NCR/Symbios 53C810 based adapter, or a Qlogic
1020/1040 based adapter. Some machines come with a SCSI chip embedded on
the mainboard. Newer machine designs and SRM versions will be able to
work with more modern SCSI chips/adapters. Check out the machine
specific info below. Please note that the rest of this discussion only
refers to Symbios chips, this is meant to include the older chips that
still have NCR stamped on them. Symbios bought NCR sometime.

The problem might bite those who have machines that started their lives
as WindowsNT boxes. The ARC or AlphaBIOS knows about other adapter types
that it can boot from than the SRM. For example you can boot from an
Adaptec 2940UW with ARC/AlphaBios but (generally) not with SRM. Some
newer machine types have introduced Adaptec boot support. Please consult
the machine specific section for details.

Most adapters that cannot be booted from work fine for data-only disks.
The differences between SRM and ARC could also get you pre-packaged IDE
CDROMs and hard drives in some (former WindowsNT) systems. SRM versions
exist (depends on the machine type) that can boot from IDE disks and
CDROMs. Check the machine specific section for details.

In order to be bootable the root partition (partition a) must be at
offset 0 of the disk drive. This means you have to use the installer's
partitioning menu and start with assigning partition a at offset 0 to
the root partition. Subsequently layout the rest of the partitions to
your liking. If you do not adhere to this rule the install will proceed
just fine, but the system will not be bootable from the freshly
installed disk. Note that fdisk is not used on FreeBSD running on Alpha,
disks are directly labeled using disklabel.

If you don't have/want a local disk drive you can boot via the Ethernet.
This assumes an Ethernet adapter/chip that is recognized by the SRM
console. Generally speaking this boils down to either a 21040 or 21142
or 21143 based Ethernet interface. Older machines or SRM versions may
not recognize the 21142 / 21143 Fast Ethernet chips, you are then
limited to using 10Mbit Ethernet for net booting those machines. Non-DEC
cards based on said chips will generally (but are not guaranteed to)
work. Note that Intel took over the 21x4x chips when it bought Digital
Semiconductor. So you might see an Intel logo on them these days. Recent
machine designs have SRM support for Intel 8255x Ethernet chips.

Alpha machines can be run with SRM on a graphics console or on a serial
console. ARC can also be run on a serial consoles if need be. VT100
emulation with 8 bit controls should at least allow you to switch from
ARC/AlphaBIOS to SRM mode without having to install a graphics card
first.

If you want to run your Alpha machine without a monitor/graphics card
just don't connect a keyboard/mouse to the machine. Instead hook up a
serial terminal[emulator] to serial port #1. The SRM will talk 9600N81
to you. This can also be really practical for debugging purposes.
Beware: some/most (?) SRMs will also present you with a console prompt
at serial port #2. The booting kernel, however, will display the boot
messages on serial port #1 and will also put the console there. This can
be extremely confusing.

Most PCI based Alphas can use ordinary PC-type VGA cards. The SRM
contains enough smarts to make that work. It does not, however, mean
that each and every PCI VGA card out on the street will work in an Alpha
machine. Things like S3 Trio64, Mach64, and Matrox Millennium generally
work. Old ET4000 based ISA cards have also worked for me. But ask around
first before buying.

Most PCI devices from the PC-world will also work in FreeBSD PCI-based
machines. Check the /sys/alpha/conf/GENERIC file for the latest word on
this. Check the appropriate machine type's discussion in case you want
to use PCI cards that have PCI bridge chips on them. In some cases you
might encounter problems with PCI cards not handling PCI parity
correctly. This can lead to panics. PCI parity checking can be disabled
using the following SRM command:

    >>> SET PCI_PARITY OFF

This is not a FreeBSD problem, all operating systems running on Alpha
hardware will need this workaround.

If your system (also) contains EISA expansion slots you will need to run
the EISA Configuration Utility (ECU) after you have installed EISA cards
or after you have upgraded your console firmware.

For Alpha CPUs you will find multiple generations. The original Alpha
design is the 21064. It was produced in a chip process called MOS4,
chips made in this process are nicknamed EV4. Newer CPUs are 21164,
21264 etc. You will see designations like EV4S, EV45, EV5, EV56, EV6,
EV67, EV68. The EVs with double digit numbers are slightly improved
versions. For example EV45 has an improved FPU and 16 kByte on-chip
separate I & D caches compared to the EV4 on which it is based. Rule of
thumb: the higher the digit immediately following ``EV'' the more
desirable (read: faster / more modern).

For memory you want at least 32 Mbytes. I have had FreeBSD run on a 16
Mbyte system but you will not enjoy that. Kernel build times halved when
I went to 32 Mbytes. Note that the SRM console steals 2Mbyte from the
total system memory (and keeps it). For more serious work 64 Mbytes or
more are recommended. Although Alpha machines typically can accomodate
large to very large physical memory sizes, FreeBSD is limited to 1 or 2
Gbytes (dependent on the core chipset) of RAM. This restriction is due
to the current implementation of the VM system.

While on the subject of memory: pay close attention to the type of
memory your machine uses. There are very different memory configurations
and requirements for the various machines.

Final word: I expect the above to sound a bit daunting to the first-time
Alpha user. Don't be daunted too much. And do feel free to ask questions
if something is not clear after reading this document.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3. System-specific information

Below is an overview of the hardware that FreeBSD runs on. This list
will definitely grow, a look in /sys/alpha/conf/GENERIC can be
enlightening.

Alpha machines are often best known by their project code name. Where
known these are listed below in parentheses.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.1. AXPpci33 (``NoName'')

The NoName is a baby-AT mainboard based on the 21066 LCA (Low Cost
Alpha) processor. NoName was originally designed for OEM-use. The LCA
chip includes almost all of the logic to drive a PCI bus and the memory
subsystem. All of this makes for a low-priced design.

Due to the limited memory interface the system is not particularly fast
in case of cache misses. As long as you stay inside the on-chip cache
the CPU is comparable to a 21064 (first generation Alpha). These boards
should be very cheap to obtain these days. It is a full-fledged 64 bit
CPU, just don't expect miracles as far as speed goes.

Features:

-   21066 Alpha CPU at 166 MHz or 21066A CPU at 233MHz. 21068 CPUs are
    also possible, but are even slower.

-   on-board Bcache / L2 cache: 0, 256k or 1 Mbyte (uses DIL chips)

-   PS/2 mouse & keyboard port OR 5pin DIN keyboard (2 mainboard models)

-   memory:

    -   bus width: 64 bits

    -   PS/2 style 72 pin 36 bit Fast Page Mode SIMMs

    -   70ns or better

    -   installed in pairs of 2

    -   4 SIMM sockets

    -   uses ECC

-   512kB Flash ROM for the console code.

-   2 16550A serial ports

-   1 parallel port

-   floppy interface

-   1 embedded IDE interface

-   expansion:

    -   3 32 bit PCI slots (1 shared with ISA)

    -   5 ISA slots (1 shared with PCI)

-   embedded Fast SCSI using a Symbios 53C810 chip

NoNames can either have SRM or ARC console firmware in their Flash ROM.
The Flash ROM is not big enough to hold both ARC and SRM at the same
time and allow software selection of alternate console code. But you
only need SRM anyway.

Cache for the NoNames are 15 or 20 ns DIL chips. For a 256 kByte cache
you want to check your junked 486 mainboard. Chips for a 1 Mbyte cache
are a rarer breed unfortunately. Getting at least a 256kByte cache is
recommended performance wise. Cache-less they are really slow.

The NoName mainboard has a PC/AT-standard power connector. It also has a
power connector for 3.3 Volts. No need to rush out to get a new power
supply. The 3.3 Volts is only needed in case you run 3.3 Volts PCI
expansion boards. These are quite rare.

The IDE interface is supported by FreeBSD and requires a line in the
kernel configuration file as follows:

    device ata

The ATA interface uses irq 14.

The SRM console unfortunately cannot boot from IDE disks. This means you
will have to use a SCSI disk as the boot device.

The NoName is somewhat stubborn when it comes to serial consoles. It
needs

    >>> SET CONSOLE SERIAL

before it goes for a serial console. Pulling the keyboard from the
machine is not sufficient, like it is on most other Alpha models. Going
back to a graphical console needs

    >>> SET CONSOLE GRAPHICS

at the serial console.

There have been reports that you sometimes need to press Control-Alt-Del
to capture the SRM's attention. I have never seen this myself, but it is
worth trying if you are greeted by a blank screen after powerup.

Make sure you use true 36 bit SIMMs, and only FPM (Fast Page Mode) DRAM.
EDO DRAM or SIMMs with fake parity will not work. The board uses the 4
extra bits for ECC. 33 bit FPM SIMMs will for the same reason not work.

Given the choice, get the PS/2-variant mainboard. Apart from giving you
a mouse port as bonus it is directly supported by Tru64 Unix in case you
ever want or need to run it. The ``DIN-plug''-variant should work OK for
FreeBSD.

The OEM manual is recommended reading.

The kernel configuration file for a NoName kernel must contain:

    options    DEC_AXPPCI_33           
    cpu EV4

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.2. Universal Desktop Box (UDB or ``Multia'')

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: Multia can be either Intel or Alpha CPU based. We assume
  Alpha based ones here for obvious reasons.

Multia is a small desktop box intended as a sort of personal
workstation. They come in a considerable number of variations, check
closely what you get.

Features:

-   21066 Alpha CPU at 166 MHz or 21066A CPU at 233MHz

-   on-board Bcache / L2 cache: COAST-like 256 kByte cache module;
    233MHz models have 512kByte of cache; 166MHz models have soldered-on
    256kB caches

-   PS/2 mouse & keyboard port

-   memory:

    -   bus width: 64 bits

    -   PS/2 style 72 pin 36 bit Fast Page Mode SIMMs

    -   70ns or better

    -   SIMMs are installed in pairs of 2

    -   4 SIMM sockets

    -   uses ECC

-   2 16550A serial ports

-   1 parallel port

-   floppy interface

-   Intel 82378ZB PCI to ISA bridge

-   1 embedded 21040 based 10Mbit Ethernet, AUI and 10base2 connector

-   expansion:

    -   1 32 bit PCI slot

    -   2 PCMCIA slots

-   on-board Crystal CS4231 or AD1848 sound chip

-   embedded Fast SCSI, using a Symbios 53C810[A] chip on the PCI riser
    card

Multia has enough Flash ROM to store both SRM and ARC code at the same
time and allow software selection of one of them.

The embeded TGA video adapter is not currently usable as a FreeBSD
console. You will need to use a serial console.

Multia has only one 32 bit PCI slot for expansion, and it is only
suitable for a small form factor PCI card. By sacrificing the PCI slot
space you can mount a 3.5" hard disk drive. Mounting stuff may have come
with your Multia. Adding a 3.5" disk is not a recommended upgrade due to
the limited power rating of the power supply and the extremely marginal
cooling of the system box.

Multia also has 2 PCMCIA expansion slots. These are currently not
supported by FreeBSD.

The CPU might or might not be socketed, check this before considering
CPU upgrade hacks. The low-end Multias have a soldered-in CPU.

Multia has 2 serial ports but routes both of them to the outside world
on a single 25 pin sub-D connector. The Multia FAQ explains how to build
your own Y-cable to allow both ports to be used.

Although the Multia SRM supports booting from floppy this can be
problematic. Typically the errors look like:

    *** Soft Error - Error #10 - FDC: Data overrun or underrun

This is not a FreeBSD problem, it is a SRM problem. The best available
workaround to install FreeBSD is to boot from a SCSI CDROM.

There have been reports that you sometimes need to press Control-Alt-Del
to capture the SRM's attention. I have never seen this myself, but it is
worth trying when you are greeted by a blank screen after powerup.

Sound works fine using pcm(4) driver and a line in the kernel
configuration file as follows for the Crystal CS4231 chip:

    device pcm

The sound device lives at port 0x530, and uses irq 9 along with drq 3.
You also need to specify flags 0x15 in the device.hints file.

I have not yet been successful in getting my Multia with the AD1848 to
play any sound.

While verifying playback I was reminded of the lack of CPU power of the
166MHz CPU. MP3 only plays acceptable using 22kHz down-sampling.

Multias are somewhat notorious for dying of heat strokes. The very
compact box does not really allow access to cooling air. Please use the
Multia on its vertical stand, don't put it horizontally (``pizza
style''). Replacing the fan with something which pushes around more air
is really recommended. You can also cut one of the wires to the fan
speed sensor. Once cut, the fan runs at a (loud) full speed. Beware of
PCI cards with high power consumption. If your system has died you might
want to check the Multia-Heat-Death pages at the NetBSD Web site for
help in reviving it.

The Intel 82378ZB PCI to ISA bridge enables the use of an IDE disk. This
requires a line in the kernel configuration file as follows:

    device ata

The ATA interface uses IRQ 14.

The IDE connector pin spacing is thought for 2.5" laptop disks. A 3.5"
IDE disk would not fit in the case anyway. At least not without
sacrificing your only PCI slot. The SRM console unfortunately does not
know how to boot from IDE disks. You will need to use a SCSI disk as the
boot disk.

In case you want to change the internal hard drive: the internal flat
cable running from the PCI riser board to the 2.5" hard drive has a
finer pitch than the standard SCSI flat cables. Otherwise it would not
fit on the 2.5" drives. There are also riser cards that have a
standard-pitch SCSI cable attached to it, which will fit an ordinary
SCSI disk.

Again, I recommend against trying to cram a replacement hard disk
inside. Use the external SCSI connector and put your disk in an external
enclosure. Multias run hot enough as-is. In most cases you will have the
external high density 50-pin SCSI connector but some Multia models came
without disk and may lack the connector. Something to check before
buying one.

The kernel configuration file for a Multia kernel must contain:

    options    DEC_AXPPCI_33
    cpu EV4

Recommended reading on Multia can be found at
http://www.netbsd.org/Ports/alpha/multiafaq.html or
http://www.brouhaha.com/~eric/computers/udb.html.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.3. Personal Workstation (``Miata'')

The Miata is a small tower machine intended to be put under a desk.
There are multiple Miata variants. The original Miata is the MX5 model.
Because it suffers from a number of hardware design flaws a redesign was
done, yielding the MiataGL. Unfortunately the variants are not easily
distinguishable at first sight from the outside of the case. An easy
check is to see if the back of the machine sports two USB connectors. If
yes, it is a MiataGL. MX5 models tend to be more common in the used
system market place.

System designations look like ``Personal Workstation 433a''. Personal
Workstation, being a bit of a mouthful, is often abbreviated to PWS.
This means it has a 433 MHz CPU, and started life as a WinNT workstation
(the trailing ``a''). Systems designated from day 1 to run Tru64 Unix or
OpenVMS will sport ``433au''. WinNT-Miatas are likely to come
pre-configured with an IDE CDROM drive. So, in general systems are named
like PWS[433,500,600]a[u].

There was also a Miata model with a special CPU cooling system by
Kryotech. The Kryotech has a special cooling system and is housed in a
different enclosure.

Features:

-   21164A EV56 Alpha CPU at 433, 500 or 600MHz

-   21174 core logic (``Pyxis'') chip

-   on-board Bcache / L3 cache: 0, 2 or 4 Mbytes (uses a cache module)

-   memory:

    -   bus width: 128 bits wide, ECC protected

    -   unbuffered 72 bit wide SDRAMs DIMMs, installed in pairs of 2

    -   6 DIMM sockets

    -   maximum memory 1.5 GBytes

-   on-board Fast Ethernet:

    -   MX5 uses a 21142 or 21143 Ethernet chip, dependent on the
        version of the PCI riser card

    -   MiataGL has a 21143 chip

    -   the bulkhead can be 10/100 Mbit UTP, or 10 Mbit UTP/BNC

-   2 on-board [E]IDE disk interfaces, based on the CMD646 (MX5) or the
    Cypress 82C693 (MiataGL)

-   1 Ultra-Wide SCSI Qlogic 1040 [MiataGL only]

-   2 64-bit PCI slots

-   3 32-bit PCI slots (behind a DEC PCI-PCI bridge chip)

-   3 ISA slots (physically shared with the 32 bit PCI slots, via an
    Intel 82378IB PCI to ISA bridge chip)

-   2 16550A serial port

-   1 parallel port

-   PS/2 keyboard & mouse port

-   USB interface [MiataGL only]

-   embedded sound based on an ESS1888 chip

The Miata logic is divided into two printed circuit boards. The lower
board in the bottom of the machine has the PCI and ISA slots and things
like the sound chip etc. The top board has the CPU, the Pyxis chip,
memory etc. Note that MX5 and the MiataGL use a different PCI riser
board. This means that you cannot just upgrade to a MiataGL CPU board
(with the newer Pyxis chip) but that you will also need a different
riser board. Apparently an MX5 riser with a MiataGL CPU board will work
but it is definitely not a supported or tested configuration. Everything
else (cabinet, wiring, etc.) is identical for MX5 and MiataGL.

MX5 has problems with DMA via the 2 64-bit PCI slots when this DMA
crosses a page boundary. The 32 bit slots don't have this problem
because the PCI-PCI bridge chip does not allow the offending transfers.
The SRM code knows about the problem and refuses to start the system if
there is a PCI card in one of the 64bit slots that it does not know
about. Cards that are ``known good'' to the SRM are allowed to be used
in the 64bit slots.

If you want to fool the SRM you can type set pci_device_override at the
SRM prompt. Just don't complain if your data mysteriously gets mangled.

The complete command is:

    >>> SET PCI_DEVICE_OVERRIDE <vendor_id><device_id>

For example:

    >>> SET PCI_DEVICE_OVERRIDE 88c15333

The most radical approach is to use:

    >>> SET PCI_DEVICE_OVERRIDE -1

This disables PCI ID checking altogether, so that you can install any
PCI card without its ID getting checked. For this to work you need a
reasonable current SRM version.

  ÷ÁÖÎÏ: Do this on your own risk..

The FreeBSD kernel reports it when it sees a buggy Pyxis chip:

    Sep 16 18:39:43 miata /kernel: cia0: Pyxis, pass 1
    Sep 16 18:39:43 miata /kernel: cia0: extended capabilities: 1<BWEN>
    Sep 16 18:39:43 miata /kernel: cia0: WARNING: Pyxis pass 1 DMA bug; no bets...

A MiataGL probes as:

    Jan  3 12:22:32 miata /kernel: cia0: Pyxis, pass 1
    Jan  3 12:22:32 miata /kernel: cia0: extended capabilities: 1<BWEN>
    Jan  3 12:22:32 miata /kernel: pcib0: <2117x PCI host bus adapter> on cia0

MiataGL does not have the DMA problems of the MX5. PCI cards that make
the MX5 SRM choke when installed in the 64bit slots are accepted without
problems by the MiataGL SRM.

The latest mainboard revisions of MX5 contain a hardware workaround for
the bug. The SRM does not know about the ECO and will complain about
unknown cards as before. So does the FreeBSD kernel by the way.

The Miata SRM can boot from IDE CDROM drives. IDE hard disk boot is
known to work for both MiataGL and MX5 disks, so you can root FreeBSD
from an IDE disk. Speeds on MX5 are around 14 Mbytes/sec assuming a
suitable drive. Miata's CMD646 chip will support up to WDMA2 mode as the
chip is too buggy for use with UDMA.

Miata MX5s generally use Qlogic 1040 based SCSI adapters. These are
bootable by the SRM console. Note that Adaptec cards are not bootable by
the Miata SRM console.

The MiataGL has a faster PCI-PCI bridge chip on the PCI riser card than
some of the MX5 riser card versions. Some of the MX5 risers have the
same chip as the MiataGL. All in all there is a lot of variation.

Not all VGA cards will work behind the PCI-PCI bridge. This manifests
itself as no video at all. Workaround is to put the VGA card ``before''
the bridge, in one of the 64 bit PCI slots. Graphics performance using a
64 bit slot is generally substantially better.

Both MX5 and MiataGL have an on-board sound chip, an ESS1888. It
emulates a SoundBlaster and can be enabled by putting

    device pcm
    device  sbc

in your kernel configuration file:

in case your Miata has the optional cache board installed make sure it
is firmly seated. A slightly loose cache has been observed to cause
weird crashes (not surprising obviously, but maybe not so obvious when
troubleshooting). The cache module is identical between MX5 and MiataGL.

Installing a 2Mb cache module achieves, apart from a 10-15% speed
increase (based on buildworld elapsed time), a decrease for PCI DMA read
bandwidth from 64bit PCI cards. A benchmark on a 64-bit Myrinet card
resulted in a decrease from 149 Mbytes/sec to 115 Mbytes/sec. Something
to keep in mind when doing really high speed things with 64 bit PCI
adapters.

Although the hardware allows you to install up to 1.5Gbyte of memory,
FreeBSD is limited to 1Gbyte because the DMA code does not correctly
handle memory above 1Gbyte.

Moving to a faster CPU is quite simple, swap out the CPU chip and set
the clock multiplier dipswitch to the speed of the new CPU.

If you experience SRM errors like

    ERROR: scancode 0xa3 not supported on PCXAL

after halting FreeBSD you should update your SRM firmware to V7.2-1 or
later. This SRM version is first available on the Firmware Update CD
V5.7, or on http://www.compaq.com/ This SRM problem is fixed on both
Miata MX5 and Miata GL.

USB is supported by FreeBSD 4.1 and later.

Disconnect the power cord before dismantling the machine, the soft-power
switch keeps part of the logic powered even when the machine is switched
off.

The kernel configuration file for a Miata kernel must contain:

    options    DEC_ST550               
    cpu EV5

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.4. Evaluation Board 64 family

In its attempts to popularize the Alpha CPU DEC produced a number of so
called Evaluation Boards. Members of this family are EB64, EB64+,
AlphaPC64 (codename ``Cabriolet''). A non-DEC member of this family is
the Aspen Alpine. The EB64 family of evaluation boards has the following
feature set:

-   21064 or 21064A CPU, 150 to 275 MHz

-   memory:

    -   memory buswidth: 128 bit

    -   PS/2 style 72 pin 33 bit Fast Page Mode SIMMs

    -   70ns or better

    -   installed in sets of 4

    -   8 SIMM sockets

    -   uses parity memory

-   Bcache / L2 cache: 0, 512 kByte, 1 Mbyte or 2 Mbytes

-   21072 (``APECS'') chip set

-   Intel 82378ZB PCI to ISA bridge chip (``Saturn'')

-   dual 16550A serial ports

-   parallel printer port

-   Symbios 53C810 Fast-SCSI (not on AlphaPC64)

-   IDE interface (only on AlphaPC64)

-   embedded 10 Mbit Ethernet (not on AlphaPC64)

-   2 PCI slots (4 slots on AlphaPC64)

-   3 ISA slots

Aspen Alpine is slightly different, but is close enough to the EB64+ to
run an EB64+ SRM EPROM (mine did..). The Aspen Alpine does not have an
embedded Ethernet, has 3 instead of 2 PCI slots. It comes with 2 Mbytes
of cache already soldered onto the mainboard. It has jumpers to select
the use of 60, 70 or 80ns SIMM speeds.

36 bits SIMMs work fine, 3 bits simply remain unused. Note the systems
use Fast Page Mode memory, not EDO memory.

The EB64+ SRM console code is housed in an UV-erasable EPROM. No easy
flash SRM upgrades for the EB64+ The latest SRM version available for
EB64+ is quite ancient anyway.

The EB64+ SRM can boot both 53C810 and Qlogic1040 SCSI adapters. Pitfall
for the Qlogic is that the firmware that is down-loaded by the SRM onto
the Qlogic chip is very old. There are no updates for the EB64+ SRM
available. So you are stuck with old Qlogic bits too. I have had quite
some problems when I wanted to use Ultra-SCSI drives on the Alpine with
Qlogic. The FreeBSD kernel can be compiled to include a much newer
Qlogic firmware revision. This is not the default because it adds
hundreds of kBytes worth of bloat to the kernel. In FreeBSD 4.1 and
later the isp firmware is contained in a kernel loadable module. All of
this might mean that you need to use a non-Qlogic adapter to boot from.

AlphaPC64 boards generally come with ARC console firmware. SRM console
code can be loaded from floppy into the Flash ROM.

The IDE interface of the AlphaPC64 is not bootable from the SRM console.
Enabling it requires the following line in the kernel configuration
file:

    device ata

The ATA interface uses irq 14.

Note that the boards require a power supply that supplies 3.3 Volts for
the CPU.

For the EB64 family machines the kernel config file must contain:

    options    DEC_EB64PLUS            
    cpu EV4

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.5. Evaluation Board 164 (``EB164, PC164, PC164LX, PC164SX'') family

EB164 is a newer design evaluation board, based on the 21164A CPU. This
design has been used to ``spin off'' multiple variations, some of which
are used by OEM manufacturers/assembly shops. Samsung did its own
PC164LX which has only 32 bit PCI, whereas the Digital variant has 64
bit PCI.

-   21164A, multiple speed variants [EB164, PC164, PC164LX]

-   21164PC [only on PC164SX]

-   21171 (Alcor) chip set [EB164]

    21172 (Alcor2) chip set [PC164]

    21174 (Pyxis) chip [164LX, 164SX]

-   Bcache / L3 cache: EB164 uses special cache-SIMMs

-   memory bus: 128 bit / 256 bit

-   memory:

    -   PS/2 style SIMMs in sets of 4 or 8

    -   36 bit, Fast Page Mode, uses ECC, [EB164 / PC164]

    -   SDRAM DIMMs in sets of 2, non-ECC or ECC can be used [PC164SX]

    -   SDRAM DIMMs in sets of 2, uses ECC [PC164LX]

-   2 16550A serial ports

-   PS/2 style keyboard & mouse

-   floppy controller

-   parallel port

-   32 bits PCI

-   64 bits PCI [some models]

-   ISA slots via an Intel 82378ZB PCI to ISA bridge chip

Using 8 SIMMs for a 256bit wide memory can yield interesting speedups
over a 4 SIMM/128bit wide memory. Obviously all 8 SIMMs must be of the
same type to make this work. The system must be explicitly setup to use
the 8 SIMM memory arrangement. You must have 8 SIMMs, 4 SIMMs
distributed over 2 banks will not work. For the AlphaPC164 you can have
a maximum of 1Gbyte of RAM, using 8 128Mbyte SIMMs. The manual indicates
the maximum is 512 Mbyte.

The SRM can boot from Qlogic 10xx boards or the Symbios 53C810[A]. Newer
Symbios 810 revisions like the Symbios 810AE are not recognized by the
SRM on PC164. PC164 SRM does not appear to recognize a Symbios 53C895
based host adapter (tested with a Tekram DC-390U2W). On the other hand
some no-name Symbios 53C985 board has been reported to work. Cards like
the Tekram DC-390F (Symbios875 based) have been confirmed to work fine
on the PC164. Unfortunately this seems to be dependent on the actual
version of the chip/board.

Symbios 53C825[a] will also work as boot adapter. Diamond FirePort,
although based on Symbios chips, is not bootable by the PC164SX SRM.
PC164SX is reported to boot fine with Symbios825, Symbios875, Symbios895
and Symbios876 based cards. In addition, Adaptec 2940U and 2940UW are
reported to work for booting (verified on SRM V5.7-1). Adaptec 2930U2
and 2940U2[W] do not work.

164LX and 164SX with SRM firmware version 5.8 or later can boot from
Adaptec 2940-series adapters. A test with an Adaptec 3940UW showed that
that one is not supported however. 164SX SRM recognises Intel 8255x
Ethernet cards which show up as eia. Using such a NIC allows network
booting.

In summary: this family of machines is ``blessed'' with a challenging
compatibility as far as SCSI adapters go.

On 164SX you can have a maximum of 1 Gbyte of RAM. 4 regular (PC100 or
PC133) 256MB DIMMs are reported to work just fine. Whether 512MB DIMMs
will also work is currently unknown. You can use ECC or non-ECC DIMMs.
The non-ECC ones are the same as commonly found in PCs. Unfortunately
the 164SX is quite picky on which DIMMs it likes, so be prepared to test
and experiment.

PCI bridge chips are sometimes not appreciated by the 164SX, they cause
SRM errors and kernel panics in those cases. This seems to depend on the
fact if the card is recognised, and therefore correctly initialised, by
the SRM console. The 164SX' onboard IDE interface is quite slow, a
Promise card gives a 3-4 times speed improvement.

On PC164 the SRM sometimes seems to lose its variable settings. ``For
PC164, current superstition says that, to avoid losing settings, you
want to first downgrade to SRM 4.x and then upgrade to 5.x.'' One sample
error that was observed was:

    ERROR: ISA table corrupt!

A sequence of a downgrade to SRM4.9, an

    >>> ISACFG -INIT

followed by

    >>> INIT

made the problem go away. Some PC164 owners report they have never seen
the problem.

On PC164SX the AlphaBIOS allows you a selection to select SRM to be used
as console on the next power up. This selection does not appear to have
any effect. In other words, you will get the AlphaBIOS regardless of
what you select. The fix is to reflash the console ROM with the SRM code
for PC164SX. This will overwrite the AlphaBIOS and will get you the SRM
console you desire. The SRM code can be found on the Compaq Web site.

164LX can either have the SRM console code or the AlphaBIOS code in its
flash ROM because the flash ROM is too small to hold both at the same
time.

PC164 can boot from IDE disks assuming your SRM version is recent
enough.

EB164 needs a power supply that supplies 3.3 Volts. PC164 does not
implement the PS_ON signal that ATX power supplies need to switch on. A
simple switch pulling this signal to ground allows you to run a standard
ATX power supply.

For the EB164 class machines the kernel config file must contain:

    options         DEC_EB164
    cpu             EV5

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.6. AlphaStation 200 (``Mustang'') and 400 (``Avanti'') series

The Digital AlphaStation 200 and 400 series systems are early low end
PCI based workstations. The 200 and 250 series are desktop boxes, the
400 series is a desk-side mini-tower.

Features:

-   21064 or 21064A CPU at speeds of 166 up to 333 MHz

-   DECchip 21071-AA core logic chip set

-   Bcache / L2 cache: 512 Kbytes (200 and 400 series) or 2048KBytes
    (250 series)

-   memory:

    -   64 bit bus width

    -   8 to 384 MBytes of RAM

    -   70 ns or better Fast Page DRAM

    -   in three pairs (200 and 400 series)

    -   in two quads, so banks of four. (250 series)

    -   the memory subsystem uses parity

-   PS/2 keyboard and mouse port

-   two 16550 serial ports

-   parallel port

-   floppy disk interface

-   32 bit PCI expansion slots (3 for the AS400-series, 2 for the AS200
    & 250-series)

-   ISA expansion slots (4 for the AS400-series, 2 for the AS200 &
    250-series) (some ISA/PCI slots are physically shared)

-   embedded 21040-based Ethernet (200 & 250 series)

-   embedded Symbios 53c810 Fast SCSI-2 chip

-   Intel 82378IB (``Saturn'') PCI-ISA bridge chip

-   graphics is embedded TGA or PCI VGA (model dependent)

-   16 bit sound (on 200 & 250 series)

The systems use parity memory SIMMs, but these do not need 36 bit wide
SIMMs. 33 bit wide SIMMs are sufficient, 36 bit SIMMs are acceptable
too. EDO or 32 bit SIMMs will not work. 4, 8, 16, 32 and 64 Mbyte SIMMs
are supported.

The AS200 & AS250 sound hardware is reported to work OK assuming you
have the following line in your kernel config file:

    device pcm

The sound device uses port 0x530, IRQ 10 and drq 0. You also need to
specify flags 0x10011 in the device.hints file.

AlphaStation 200 & 250 series have an automatic SCSI terminator. This
means that as soon as you plug a cable onto the external SCSI connector
the internal terminator of the system is disabled. It also means that
you should not leave unterminated cables plugged into the machine.

AlphaStation 400 series have an SRM variable that controls termination.
In case you have external SCSI devices connected you must set this SRM
variable using

    >>> SET CONTROL_SCSI_TERM EXTERNAL.

If only internal SCSI devices are present use:

    >>> SET CONTROL_SCSI_TERM INTERNAL

For the AlphaStation-[24][05]00 machines the kernel config file must
contain:

    options    DEC_2100_A50
    cpu EV4

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.7. AlphaStation 500 and 600 (``Alcor'' & ``Maverick'' for EV5, ``Bret'' for EV56)

AS500 and 600 were the high-end EV5 / PCI based workstations. EV6 based
machines have in the meantime taken their place as front runners. AS500
is a desktop in a dark blue case (TopGun blue), AS600 is a sturdy
desk-side box. AS600 has a nice LCD panel to observe the early stages of
SRM startup.

Features:

-   21164 EV5 CPU at 266, 300, 333, 366, 400, 433, 466, or 500 MHz
    (AS500) or at 266, 300 or 333 MHz (AS600)

-   21171 (Alcor) or 21172 (Alcor2) core logic chip set

-   Cache:

    -   2 or 4 Mb L3 / Bcache (AS600 at 266 MHz)

    -   4 Mb L3 / Bcache (AS600 at 300 MHz)

    -   2 or 8 Mb L3 / Bcache (8 Mb on 500 MHz version only)

    -   2 to 16 Mb L3 / Bcache (AS600; 3 cache-SIMM slots)

-   memory buswidth: 256 bits

-   AS500 memory:

    -   industry standard 72 bit wide buffered Fast Page Mode DIMMs

    -   8 DIMM slots

    -   installed in sets of 4

    -   maximum memory is 1 GB (512 Mb max on 333 MHz CPUs)

    -   uses ECC

-   AS600 memory:

    -   industry standard 36 bit Fast Page Mode SIMMs

    -   32 SIMM slots

    -   installed in sets of 8

    -   maximum memory is 1 GB

    -   uses ECC

-   Qlogic 1020 based wide SCSI bus (1 bus/chip for AS500, 2 buses/chip
    for AS600)

-   21040 based 10 Mbit Ethernet adapter, both Thinwire and UTP
    connectors

-   expansion:

    -   AS500:

        -   3 32-bit PCI slots

        -   1 64-bit PCI slot

    -   AS600:

        -   2 32-bit PCI slot

        -   3 64-bit PCI slots

        -   1 PCI/EISA physically shared slot

        -   3 EISA slots

        -   1 PCI and 1 EISA slot are occupied by default

-   21050 PCI-to-PCI bridge chip

-   Intel 82375EB PCI-EISA bridge (AS600 only)

-   2 16550A serial ports

-   1 parallel port

-   16 bit audio Windows Sound System, in a dedicated slot (AS500) in
    EISA slot (AS600, this is an ISA card)

-   PS/2 keyboard and mouse port

Early machines had Fast SCSI interfaces, later ones are Ultra SCSI
capable. AS500 shares its single SCSI bus with internal and external
devices. For a Fast SCSI bus you are limited to 1.8 meters bus length
external to the box. The AS500 Qlogic ISP1020A chip can be set to run in
Ultra mode by setting a SRM variable. FreeBSD however follows the Qlogic
chip errata and limits the bus speed to Fast.

Beware of ancient SRM versions on AS500. When you see weird SCSI speeds
being reported by FreeBSD like

    cd0 at isp0 bus 0 target 4 lun 0
    cd0: <DEC RRD45   DEC 0436> Removable CD-ROM SCSI-2 device
    cd0: 250.000MB/s transfers (250.000MHz, offset 12)

it is time to do a SRM console firmware upgrade.

AS600 has one Qlogic SCSI chip dedicated to the internal devices whereas
the other Qlogic SCSI chip is dedicated to external SCSI devices. Keep
the card, which apart from the two SCSI interfaces also houses the
Ethernet chip by the way in the DEC-recommended, topmost, 32bit PCI
slot. You get machine checks if you plug it into one of the 64 bit
slots.

In AS500 DIMMs are installed in sets of 4, in ``physically interleaved''
layout. So, a bank of 4 DIMMs is not 4 physically adjacent DIMMs. Note
that the DIMMs are not SDRAM DIMMs.

In AS600 the memory SIMMs are placed onto two memory daughter cards.
SIMMs are installed in sets of 8. Both memory daughter cards must be
populated identically.

Note that both AS500 and AS600 are EISA machines. This means you have to
run the EISA Configuration Utility (ECU) from floppy after adding EISA
cards or to change things like the configuration settings of the onboard
I/O. For AS500 which does not have a physical EISA slot the ECU is used
to configure the onboard sound interface etc.

AS500 onboard sound can be used by adding a line like

    device pcm

to the kernel configuration file.

Using the ECU I configured my AS500 to use IRQ 10, port 0x530, drq 0.
Corresponding entries along with flags 0x10011 must go into the
device.hints file. Note that the flags value is rather non-standard.

AS600 has a peculiarity for its PCI slots. AS600 (or rather the PCI
expansion card containing the SCSI adapters) does not allow I/O port
mapping, therefore all devices behind it must use memory mapping. If you
have problems getting the Qlogic SCSI adapters to work, add the
following option to /boot/loader.rc:

    set isp_mem_map=0xff

This may need to be typed at the boot loader prompt before booting the
installation kernel.

For the AlphaStation-[56]00 machines the kernel config file must
contain:

    options    DEC_KN20AA 
    cpu EV5

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.8. AlphaServer 1000 (``Mikasa''), 1000A (``Noritake'') and 800(``Corelle'')

The AlphaServer 1000 and 800 range of machines are intended as
departmental servers. They come in quite some variations in packaging
and mainboard/cpu. Generally speaking there are 21064 (EV4) CPU based
machines and 21164 (EV5) based ones. The CPU is on a daughter card, and
the type of CPU (EV4 or EV5) must match the mainboard in use.

AlphaServer 800 has a much smaller mini tower case, it lacks the
StorageWorks SCSI hot-plug chassis. The main difference between AS1000
and AS1000A is that AS1000A has 7 PCI slots whereas AS1000 only has 3
PCI slots and has EISA slots instead.

AS800 with an EV5/400 MHz CPU was later re-branded to become a ``DIGITAL
Server 3300[R]'', AS800 with an EV5/500 MHz CPU was later re-branded to
become a ``DIGITAL Server 3305[R]''.

Features:

-   21064 EV4[5] CPU at 200, 233 or 266 MHz 21164 EV5[6] CPU at 300, 333
    or 400 MHz (or 500 MHz for AS800 only)

-   memory:

    -   buswidth: 128 bit with ECC

    -   AS1000[A]:

        -   72pin 36 bit Fast Page Mode SIMMs, 70ns or better

        -   16 (EV5 machines) or 20 (EV4 machines) SIMM slots

        -   max memory is 1 GB

        -   uses ECC

    -   AS800: Uses 60ns 3.3 Volts EDO DIMMs

-   embedded VGA (on some mainboard models)

-   3 PCI, 2 EISA, 1 64-bit PCI/EISA combo (AS800)

-   7 PCI, 2 EISA (AS1000A)

-   2 PCI, 1 EISA/PCI, 7 EISA (AS1000)

-   embedded SCSI based on Symbios 810 [AS1000] or Qlogic 1020 [AS1000A]

AS1000 based machines come in multiple enclosure types. Floor standing,
rack-mount, with or without StorageWorks SCSI chassis etc. The
electronics are the same.

AS1000-systems: All EV4 based machines use standard PS/2 style 36 bit
72pin SIMMs in sets of 5. The fifth SIMM is used for ECC. All EV5 based
machines use standard PS/2 style 36 bit 72pin SIMMs in sets of 4. The
ECC is done based on the 4 extra bits per SIMM (4 bits out of 36). The
EV5 mainboards have 16 SIMM slots, the EV4 mainboards have 20 slots.

AS800 machines use DIMMs in sets of 4. DIMM installation must start in
slots marked bank 0. A bank is four physically adjacent slots. The
biggest size DIMMs must be installed in bank 0 in case 2 banks of
different DIMM sizes are used. Max memory size is 2GB. Note that these
are EDO DIMMs.

The AS1000/800 are somewhat stubborn when it comes to serial consoles.
They need

    >>> SET CONSOLE SERIAL

before they go for a serial console. Pulling the keyboard from the
machine is not sufficient, like it is on most other Alpha models. Going
back to a graphical console needs

    >>> SET CONSOLE GRAPHICS

at the serial console.

For AS800 you want to check if your Ultra-Wide SCSI is indeed in Ultra
mode. This can be done using the EEROMCFG.EXE utility that is on the
Console Firmware Upgrade CDROM.

For the AlphaServer1000/1000A/800 machines the kernel config file must
contain:

    options    DEC_1000A
    cpu EV4     # depends on the CPU model installed
    cpu EV5     # depends on the CPU model installed

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.9. DS10/VS10/XP900 (``Webbrick'') / XP1000 (``Monet'') / DS10L (``Slate'')

Webbrick and Monet are high performance workstations/servers based on
the EV6 CPU and the Tsunami chipset. Tsunami is also used in much
higher-end systems and as such has plenty of performance to offer. DS10,
VS10 and XP900 are different names for essentially the same system. The
differences are the software and options that are supported. DS10L is a
DS10 based machine in a 1U high rackmount enclosure. DS10L is intended
for ISPs and for HPTC clusters (e.g. Beowulf)

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.9.1. ``Webbrick / Slate''

-   21264 EV6 CPU at 466 MHz

-   L2 / Bcache: 2MB, ECC protected

-   memory bus: 128 bit via crossbar, 1.3GB/sec memory bandwidth

-   memory:

    -   industry standard 200 pin 83 MHz buffered ECC SDRAM DIMMs

    -   4 DIMM slots for DS10; 2GB max memory

    -   2 DIMM slots for DS10L; 1GB max memory

    -   DIMMs are installed in pairs of 2

-   21271 Core Logic chipset (``Tsunami'')

-   2 on-board 21143 Fast Ethernet controllers

-   AcerLabs M5237 (Aladdin-V) USB controller (disabled)

-   AcerLabs M1533 PCI-ISA bridge

-   AcerLabs Aladdin ATA-33 controller

-   embedded dual EIDE

-   expansion: 3 64-bit PCI slots and 1 32-bit PCI slot. DS10L has a
    single 64bit PCI slot

-   2 16550A serial ports

-   1 parallel port

-   2 USB

-   PS/2 keyboard & mouse port

The system has a smart power controller. This means that parts of the
system remain powered when it is switched off (like an ATX-style PC
power supply). Before servicing the machine remove the power cord.

The smart power controller is called the RMC. When enabled, typing
EscapeEscapeRMC on serial port 1 will bring you to the RMC prompt. RMC
allows you to powerup or powerdown, reset the machine, monitor and set
temperature trip levels etc. RMC has its own builtin help.

Webbrick is shipped in a desktop-style case similar to the older 21164
``Maverick'' workstations but this case offers much better access to the
components. If you intend to build a farm you can rackmount them in a
19-inch rack; they are 3U high. Slate is 1U high but has only one PCI
slot.

DS10 has 4 DIMM slots. DIMMs are installed as pairs. Please note that
DIMM pairs are not installed in adjacent DIMM sockets but rather
physically interleaved. DIMM sizes of 32, 64, 128, 256 and 512 Mbytes
are supported.

When 2 pairs of identical-sized DIMMs are installed DS10 will use memory
interleaving for increased performance. DS10L, which has only 2 DIMM
slots cannot do interleaving.

Starting with SRM firmware version 5.9 you can boot from Adaptec
2940-series adapters in addition to the usual set of Qlogic and
Symbios/NCR adapters. KZPEA aka Adaptec 39160 gives you dual channel LVD
U160 SCSI which is bootable from SRM.

The base model comes with a FUJITSU 9.5GB ATA disk as its boot device.
FreeBSD works just fine using EIDE disks on Webbrick. DS10 has 2 IDE
interfaces on the mainboard. Machines destined for Tru64 Unix or VMS are
standard equipped with Qlogic-driven Ultra-SCSI disks

On the PCI bus 32 and 64 bit cards are supported, in 3.3V and 5V
variants.

The USB ports are not supported and are disabled by the SRM console in
all recent SRM versions.

The kernel config file must contain:

    options    DEC_ST6600    
    cpu EV5

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: Contrary to expectation there is no cpu EV6 defined for
  inclusion in the kernel config file. The cpu EV5 is mandatory to keep
  config(8) happy.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.9.2. ``Monet''

-   21264 EV6 at 500 MHz 21264 EV67 at 500 or 667 MHz (XP1000G,
    codenamed Brisbane) CPU is mounted on a daughter-card which is
    field-upgradable

-   L2 / Bcache: 4MB, ECC protected

-   memory bus: 256 bit

-   memory: 128 or 256 Mbytes 100 MHz (PC100) 168 pin JEDEC standard,
    registered ECC SDRAM DIMMs

-   21271 core logic chip set (``Tsunami'')

-   1 on-board 21143 Ethernet controller

-   Cypress 82C693 USB controller

-   Cypress 82C693 PCI-ISA bridge

-   Cypress 82C693 controller

-   expansion: 2 independent PCI buses, driven by high-speed I/O
    channels called ``hoses'':

    -   hose 0: (the upper 3 slots) 2 64-bit PCI slots 1 32-bit PCI slot

    -   hose 1: (the bottom 2 slots) 2 32-bit PCI slots (behind a 21154
        PCI-PCI bridge)

    -   2 of the 64-bit PCI slots are for full-length cards

    -   all of the 32-bit PCI slots are for short cards

    -   1 of the 32-bit PCI slots is physically shared with an ISA slot

    -   all PCI slots run at 33MHz

-   1 Ultra-Wide SCSI port based on a Qlogic 1040 chip

-   2 16550A serial port

-   1 parallel port

-   PS/2 keyboard & mouse port

-   embedded 16-bit ESS ES1888 sound chip

-   2 USB ports

-   graphics options: ELSA Gloria Synergy or DEC/Compaq PowerStorm 3D
    accelerator cards

Monet is housed in a mini-tower like enclosure quite similar to the
Miata box.

The on-board Qlogic UW-SCSI chip supports up to 4 internal devices.
There is no external connector for the on-board SCSI.

For 500 MHz CPUs 83 MHz DIMMs will do. Compaq specifies PC100 DIMMs for
all CPU speeds. DIMMs are installed in sets of 4, starting with the DIMM
slots marked ``0'' Memory capacity is max 4 GB. DIMMs are installed
``physically interleaved'', note the markings of the slots. Memory
bandwidth of Monet is twice that of Webbrick. The DIMMs live on the CPU
daughter-card. Note that the system uses ECC RAM so you need DIMMs with
72 bits (not the generic PC-class 64 bit DIMMs)

The EIDE interface is usable / SRM bootable so FreeBSD can be rooted on
an EIDE disk. Although the Cypress chip has potential for 2 EIDE
channels Monet uses only one of them.

The USB interface is supported by FreeBSD.If you experience problems
trying to use the USB interface please check if the SRM variable
usb_enable is set to on. You can change this by performing:

    >>> SET USB_ENABLE ON

  ÷ÁÖÎÏ: Don"t try to use Symbios-chip based SCSI adapters in the PCI
  slots connected to hose 1. There is a not-yet-found FreeBSD bug that
  prevents this from working correctly.

  ÷ÁÖÎÏ: Not all VGA cards will work behind the PCI-PCI bridge (so in
  slots 4 and 5). Only cards that implement VGA-legacy addressing
  correctly will work. Workaround is to put the VGA card ``before'' the
  bridge.

The sound chip is not currently supported with FreeBSD.

The kernel config file must contain:

    options    DEC_ST6600    
    cpu EV5

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: Contrary to expectation there is no cpu EV6 defined for
  inclusion in the kernel config file. The cpu EV5 is mandatory to keep
  config(8) happy.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.10. DS20/DS20E (``Goldrush'')

Features:

-   21264 EV6 CPU at 500 or 670 MHz

-   dual CPU capable machine

-   L2 / Bcache: 4 Mbytes per CPU

-   memory bus: dual 256 bit wide with crossbar switch

-   memory:

    -   SDRAM DIMMs

    -   installed in sets of 4

    -   16 DIMM slots, max. 4GB

    -   uses ECC

-   21271 core logic chip set (``Tsunami'')

-   embedded Adaptec ? Wide Ultra SCSI

-   expansion:

    -   2 independent PCI buses, driven by high-speed I/O channels
        called ``hoses''

    -   6 64-bit PCI slots, 3 per hose

    -   1 ISA slot

DS20 needs

    >>> SET CONSOLE SERIAL

before it goes for a serial console. Pulling the keyboard from the
machine is not sufficient. Going back to a graphical console needs

    >>> SET CONSOLE GRAPHICS

at the serial console. Confusing is the fact that you will get SRM
console output on the graphics console with the console set to serial,
but when FreeBSD boots it honors the CONSOLE variable setting and all
the boot messages as well as the login prompt will go to the serial
port.

The DS20 is housed in a fat cube-like enclosure. The enclosure also
contains a StorageWorks SCSI hot-swap shelf for a maximum of seven 3.5"
SCSI devices. The DS20E is in a sleeker case, and lacks the StorageWorks
shelf.

The system has a smart power controller. This means that parts of the
system remain powered when it is switched off (like an ATX-style PC
power supply). Before servicing the machine remove the power cord(s).

The smart power controller is called the RMC. When enabled, typing
EscapeEscapeRMC on serial port 1 will bring you to the RMC prompt. RMC
allows you to powerup or powerdown, reset the machine, monitor and set
temperature trip levels etc. RMC has its own builtin help.

The embedded Adaptec SCSI chip on the DS20 is disabled and is therefore
not usable under FreeBSD.

Starting with SRM firmware version 5.9 you can boot from Adaptec
2940-series adapters in addition to the usual set of Qlogic and
Symbios/NCR adapters. This unfortunately does not include the embedded
Adaptec SCSI chips. You can use a KZPEA aka Adaptec 39160 for dual
channel LVD U160 SCSI, which is bootable from SRM.

If you are using banks of DIMMs of different sizes the biggest DIMMs
should be installed in the DIMM slots marked 0 on the mainboard. The
DIMM slots should be filled ``in order'' so after bank 0 install in bank
1 and so on.

Don't try to use Symbios-chip based SCSI adapters in the PCI slots
connected to hose 1. There is a not-yet-found FreeBSD bug that prevents
this from working correctly. DS20 ships by default with a Symbios on
hose 1 so you have to move this card before you can install/boot FreeBSD
on it.

The kernel config file must contain:

    options    DEC_ST6600    
    cpu EV5

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: Contrary to expectation there is no cpu EV6 defined for
  inclusion in the kernel config file. The cpu EV5 is mandatory to keep
  config(8) happy.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.11. AlphaPC 264DP / UP2000

UP2000 was built by Alpha Processor Inc.

Features:

-   21264 EV6 CPU at 670 or 750 MHz

-   dual CPU capable

-   L2 / Bcache: 4 Mbytes per CPU

-   memory bus: 256 bit

-   memory: SDRAM DIMMs installed in sets of 4, uses ECC, 16 DIMM slots,
    max. 4GB

-   21272 core logic chip set (``Tsunami'')

-   2 embedded Adaptec AIC7890/91 Wide Ultra2 SCSI chips

-   2 embedded IDE based on Cypress 82C693 chips

-   embedded USB via Cypress 82C693

-   expansion:

    -   2 independent PCI buses, driven by high-speed I/O channels
        called ``hoses''

    -   6 64-bit PCI slots, 3 per hose

    -   1 ISA slot

Currently a maximum of 2GB memory is supported by FreeBSD.

The on-board Adaptec SCSI HBAs are bootable on UP2000.

Busmaster DMA is supported on the first IDE interface only. The system
can boot from it's IDE hard drives and cdrom drives.

The kernel config file must contain:

    options    DEC_ST6600    
    cpu EV5

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: Contrary to expectation there is no cpu EV6 defined for
  inclusion in the kernel config file. The cpu EV5 is mandatory to keep
  config(8) happy.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.12. AlphaServer 2000 (``DemiSable''), 2100 (``Sable''), 2100A (``Lynx'')

The AlphaServer 2[01]00 machines are intended as departmental servers.
This is medium iron. They are multi-CPU machines, up to 2 CPUs (AS2000)
or 4 CPUs (2100[A]) can be installed. Both floor-standing and 19"
rackmount boxes exist. Rackmount variations have different numbers of
I/O expansion slots, different max number of CPUs and different maximum
memory size. Some of the boxes come with an integral StorageWorks shelf
to house hot-swap SCSI disks. There was an upgrade program available to
convert your Sable machine into a Lynx by swapping the I/O backplane
(the C-bus backplane remains). CPU upgrades were available as well.

-   21064 EV4[5] CPU[s] at 200, 233, 275 MHz or 21164 EV5[6] CPU[s]s at
    250, 300, 375, 400 MHz

-   cache: varies in size with the CPU model; 1, 4 or 8Mbyte per CPU

-   embedded floppy controller driving a 2.88 Mbytes drive

-   embedded 10Mbit 21040 Ethernet [AS2100 only]

-   2 serial ports

-   1 parallel port

-   PS/2 style keyboard & mouse port

The CPUs spec-ed as 200 MHz are in reality running at 190 MHz. Maximum
number of CPUs is 4. All CPUs must be of the same type/speed.

If any of the processors are ever marked as failed, they will remain
marked as failed even after they have been replaced (or reseated) until
you issue the command

    >>> CLEAR_ERROR ALL

on the SRM console and power-cycle the machine. This may be true for
other modules (IO and memory) as well, but it has not been verified.

The machines use dedicated memory boards. These boards live on a 128 bit
C-bus shared with the CPU boards. DemiSable supports up to 1GB, Sable up
to 2GB. One of the memory bus slots can either hold a CPU or a memory
card. A 4 CPU machine can have a maximum of 2 memory boards.

Some memory board models house SIMMs. These are called SIMM carriers.
There are also memory modules that have soldered-on memory chips instead
of SIMMs. These are called ``flat memory modules''.

SIMM boards are used in sets of eight 72-pin 36 bit FPM memory of 70ns
or faster. SIMM types supported are 1M x36 bit (4 Mbyte), 2M x36bit (8
Mbyte) and 4M x36 bit (16 Mbyte). Each memory board can house 4 banks of
SIMMs. SIMM sizes can not be mixed on a single memory board. The first
memory module must be filled with SIMMs before starting to fill the next
memory module. Note that the spacing between the slots is not that big,
so make sure your SIMMs fit physically (before buying them..)

Both Lynx and Sable are somewhat stubborn when it comes to serial
consoles. They need

    >>> SET CONSOLE SERIAL

before they go for a serial console. Pulling the keyboard from the
machine is not sufficient, like it is on many other Alpha models. Going
back to a graphical console needs

    >>> SET CONSOLE GRAPHICS

at the serial console. On Lynx keep the VGA card in one of the primary
PCI slots. EISA VGA cards are not slot sensitive.

The machines are equipped with a small OCP (Operator Control Panel) LCD
screen. On this screen the self-test messages are displayed during
system initialization. You can put your own little text there by using
the SRM:

    >>> SET OCP_TEXT "FreeBSD"
         

The SRM

    >>> SHOW FRU

command produces an overview of your configuration with module serial
numbers, hardware revisions and error log counts.

Both Sable, DemiSable and Lynx have Symbios 810 based Fast SCSI
on-board. Check if it is set to Fast SCSI speed by

    >>> SHOW PKA0_FAST

When set to 1 it is negotiating for Fast speeds.

    >>> SET PKA0_FAST 1

enables Fast SCSI speeds.

AS2100[A] come equipped with a StorageWorks 7 slot SCSI cage. A second
cage can be added inside the cabinet. AS2000 has a single 7 slot SCSI
cage, which cannot be expanded with an additional one. Note that the
slot locations in these cages map differently to SCSI IDs compared to
the standard StorageWorks shelves. Slot IDs from top to bottom are 0, 4,
1, 5, 2, 6, 3 when using a single bus configuration.

The cage can also be set to provide two independent SCSI buses. This is
used for embedded RAID controllers like the KZPSC (Mylex DAC960). Slot
ID assignments for split bus are, from top to bottom: 0A, 0B, 1A, 1B,
2A, 2B, 3A, 3B. Where A and B signify a SCSI bus. In a single bus
configuration the terminator module on the back of the SCSI cage is on
the TOP. The jumper module is on the BOTTOM. For split bus operation
these two modules are reversed. The terminator can be distinguished from
the jumper by noting the chips on the terminator. The jumper does not
have any active components on it.

DemiSable has 7 EISA slots and 3 PCI slots. Sable has 8 EISA and 3 PCI
slots. Lynx, being newer, has 8 PCI and 3 EISA slots. The Lynx PCI slots
are grouped in sets of 4. The 4 PCI slots closest to the CPU/memory
slots are the primary slots, so logically before the PCI bridge chip.
Note that contrary to expectation the primary PCI slots are the highest
numbered ones (PCI4 - PCI7).

Make sure you run the EISA Configuration Utility (from floppy) when
adding/change expansion cards in EISA slots or after upgrading your
console firmware. This is done by inserting the ECU floppy and typing

    >>> RUNECU

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: EISA slots are currently unsupported, but the Compaq
  Qvision EISA VGA adapter is treated as an ISA device. It therefore
  works OK as a console.

A special Extended I/O module for use on the C-bus was planned-for. If
they ever saw daylight is unknown. In any case FreeBSD has never been
verified with an ExtIO module.

The machines can be equipped with redundant power supplies. Note that
the enclosure is equipped with interlock switches that switch off power
when the enclosure is opened. The system's cooling fans are speed
controlled. When the machine has more than 2 CPUs and more than 1 memory
board dual power supplies are mandatory.

The kernel config file must contain:

    options    DEC_2100_A500
    cpu EV4 #dependent on CPU model installed
    cpu EV5 #dependent on CPU model installed

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.13. AlphaServer 4x00 (``Rawhide'')

The AlphaServer 4x00 machines are intended as small enterprise servers.
Expect a 30" high pedestal cabinet or alternatively the same system box
in a 19" rack. Rawhides are multi-CPU machines, up to 4 CPUs can be in a
single machine. Basic disk storage is housed in one or two StorageWorks
shelves at the bottom of the pedestal. The Rawhides intended for the NT
market are designated DIGITAL Server 7300 (5/400 CPU), DIGITAL Server
7305 (5/533 CPU). A trailing R on the part-number means a rackmount
variant.

Features:

-   21164 EV5 CPUs at 266, 300, 333 MHz or 21164A EV56 CPUs at 400, 466,
    533, 600 Mhz

-   cache: 4 Mbytes per CPU. EV5 300 MHz was also available cache-less.
    8 Mbytes for EV56 600Mhz

-   memory bus: 128 bit with ECC

-   embedded floppy controller

-   2 serial ports

-   1 parallel port

-   PS/2 style keyboard & mouse port

Rawhide can be equipped with a variety of CPU modules. CPU modules exist
in versions with and without external cache. In all cases the CPU
modules installed always must be of the same speed. A mix of NT-only and
full-blown Tru64/VMS CPUs works fine. It will however result in the
system reporting itself to the operating system as a Digital Server 730x
(so the NT-only variant). FreeBSD does not care, but such a system will
not allow Tru64 or VMS to run.

Rawhide uses a maximum of 8 RAM modules. These modules are used in pairs
and supply 72 bits to the bus (this includes ECC bits). Memory can be
EDO RAM or synchronous DRAM. A fully populated AS4100 has 4 pairs of
memory modules. The AS4000 model is limited to 2 pairs of memory
modules. Given the choice use SDRAM for best performance. The highest
capacity memory boards must be in the memory slots marked MEM0L and
MEM0H. A mix of memory board sizes is allowed. A mix of EDO and SDRAM
works as well (assuming you don't try to mix EDO and SDRAM in a single
module pair). A mix of EDO and SDRAM results in the entire memory
subsystem running at the slower EDO timing.

Rawhide has an embedded Symbios 810 chip that gives you a narrow
fast-SCSI bus. Generally only the SCSI CDROM is driven by this
interface.

Rawhides are available with a 8 64-bit PCI / 3 EISA slot expansion
backplanes (called ``Saddle'' modules). There are 2 separate PCI buses,
PCI0 and PCI1. PCI0 has 1 dedicated PCI slot and (shared) 3 PCI/EISA
slots. PCI0 also has a PCI/EISA bridge that drives things like the
serial and parallel ports, keyboard/mouse etc. PCI1 has 4 PCI slots and
a Symbios 810 SCSI chip. VGA console cards must be installed in a slot
connected to PCI0.

The current FreeBSD implementation has problems in handling PCI bridges.
There is currently a limited fix in place which allows for single level,
single device PCI bridges. The fix allows the use of the Digital
supplied Qlogic SCSI card which sits behind a 21054 PCI bridge chip.

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: EISA slots are currently unsupported, but the Compaq
  Qvision EISA VGA adapter is treated as an ISA device. It therefore
  works as a console. In case you use EISA options in your machine you
  must run the EISA Configuration Utility (ECU) from floppy. Do yourself
  a favor and use the Tru64/OpenVMS ECU, and not the WindowsNT ECU.

Rawhide employs an I2C based power controller system. If you want to be
sure all power is removed from the system remove all mains cables from
the system.

Rawhide comes with RCM functionality, which means you can power it
on/off remotely, reset it etc. See also the description for the RMC in
the DS10 section of this document. RCM versus RMC is not a typo, the
various documentation I consulted used both acronyms interchangably.
Note that if you want remote power on/off to function you need to
connect a small DC adapter to the machine in order to have the RCM logic
powered. You need to supply 9-12V DC to the small inlet located next to
the keyboard connector.

The kernel config file must contain:

    options    DEC_KN300
    cpu EV5

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.14. AlphaServer 1200 (``Tincup'') and AlphaStation 1200 (``DaVinci'')

The AlphaServer 1200 machine is the successor to the AlphaServer 1000A.
It uses the same enclosure the 1000A uses, but the logic is based on the
AlphaServer 4000 design. These are multi-CPU machines, up to 2 CPUs can
be in a single machine. Basic disk storage is housed in a StorageWorks
shelves The AS1200 intended for the NT market were designated DIGITAL
Server 5300 (5/400 CPU) and DIGITAL Server 5305 (5/533 CPU).

Features:

-   21164A EV56 CPUs at 400 or 533 Mhz

-   cache: 4 Mbytes per CPU

-   memory bus: 128 bit with ECC, DIMM memory on two memory daughter
    boards

-   embedded floppy controller

-   2 serial ports

-   1 parallel port

-   PS/2 style keyboard & mouse port

AS1200 uses 2 memory daughter cards. On each of these cards are 8 DIMM
slots. DIMMs must be installed in pairs. The maximum memory size is 4
GBytes. Slots must be filled in order and slot 0 must contain the
largest size DIMM if different sized DIMMs are used. AS1200 employs
fixed starting addresses for DIMMs, each DIMM pair starts at a 512 Mbyte
boundary. This means that if DIMMs smaller than 256 Mbyte are used the
system's physical memory map will contain ``holes''. Supported DIMM
sizes are 64 Mbytes and 256 Mbytes. The DIMMs are 72 bit SDRAM based, as
the system employs ECC.

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: FreeBSD currently supports up to 2GBytes

AS1200 has an embedded Symbios 810 drive Fast SCSI bus.

Tincup has 5 64-bit PCI slots, one 1 32-bit PCI slot and one EISA slot
(which is physically shared with one of the 64-bit PCI slots). There are
2 separate PCI buses, PCI0 and PCI1. PCI0 has the 32-bit PCI slot and
the 2 top-most 64-bit PCI slots. PCI0 also has an Intel 82375EB PCI/EISA
bridge that drives things like the serial and parallel ports,
keyboard/mouse etc. PCI1 has 4 64-bit PCI slots and a Symbios 810 SCSI
chip. VGA console cards must be installed in a slot connected to PCI0.

The system employs an I2C based power controller system. If you want to
be sure all power is removed from the system remove the mains cables
from the system. Tincup uses dual power supplies in load-sharing mode
and not as a redundancy pair.

The kernel config file must contain:

    options    DEC_KN300
    cpu EV5

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.15. AlphaServer 8200 and 8400 (``TurboLaser'')

The AlphaServer 8200 and 8400 machines are enterprise servers. Expect a
tall 19" cabinet (8200) or fat (8400) 19" rack. This is big iron, not a
hobbyist system. TurboLasers are multi-CPU machines, up to 12 CPUs can
be in a single machine. The TurboLaser System Bus (TLSB) allows 9 nodes
on the AS8400 and 5 nodes on the AS8200. TLSB is 256 bit data, 40 bit
address allowing 2.1 GBytes/sec. Nodes on the TLSB can be CPUs, memory
or I/O. A maximum of 3 I/O ports are supported on a TLSB.

Basic disk storage is housed in a StorageWorks shelf. AS8400 uses 3
phase power, AS8200 uses single phase power.

Features:

-   21164 EV5/EV56 CPUs at up to 467 MHz or 21264 EV67 CPUs at up to 625
    MHz

-   one or two CPUs per CPU module

-   cache: 4Mbytes B-cache per CPU

-   memory bus: 256 bit with ECC

-   memory: big memory modules that plug into the TLSB, which in turn
    hold special SIMM modules. Memory modules come in varying sizes, up
    to 4 GBytes a piece. Uses ECC (8 bits per 64 bits of data) 7 memory
    modules max for AS8400, 3 modules max for AS8200. Maximum memory is
    28 GBytes.

-   expansion: 3 system ``I/O ports'' that allow up to 12 I/O channels
    each I/O channel can connect to XMI, Futurebus+ or PCI boxes

FreeBSD supports (and has been tested with) up to 2 GBytes of memory on
TurboLaser. There is a trade-off to be made between TLSB slots occupied
by memory modules and TLSB slots occupied by CPU modules. For example
you can have 28GBytes of memory but only 2 CPUs (1 module) at the same
time.

Only PCI expansion is supported on FreeBSD. XMI or Futurebus+ (which are
AS8400 only) are both unsupported.

The I/O port modules are designated KFTIA or KFTHA. The I/O port modules
supply so called ``hoses'' that connect to up to 4 (KFTHA) PCI buses or
1 PCI bus (KFTIA). KFTIA has embedded dual 10baseT Ethernet, single
FDDI, 3 SCSI Fast Wide Differential SCSI buses and a single Fast Wide
Single Ended SCSI bus. The FWSE SCSI is intended for the CDROM.

KFTHA can drive via each of its 4 hoses a DWLPA or DWLPB box. The DWLPx
house a 12 slots 32 bit PCI backplane. Physically the 12 slots are 3
4-slot buses but to the software it appears as a single 12 slots PCI
bus. A fully expanded AS8x00 can have 3 (I/O ports) times 4 (hoses)
times 12 (PCI slots/DWLPx) = 144 PCI slots. The maximum bandwidth per
KFTHA is 500 Mbytes/second. DWLPA can also house 8 EISA cards, 2 slots
are PCI-only, 2 slots are EISA only. Of the 12 slots 2 are always
occupied by an I/O and connector module. DWLPB are the prefered I/O
boxes.

For best performance distribute high bandwidth (FibreChannel, Gigabit
Ethernet) over multiple hoses and/or multiple KFTHA/KFTIA.

Currently PCI expansion cards containing PCI bridges are not usable with
FreeBSD. Don't use them at this time.

The single ended narrow SCSI bus on the KFTIA will turn up as the fourth
SCSI bus. The 3 fast-wide differential SCSI buses of the KFTIA precede
it.

AS8x00 are generally run with serial consoles. Some newer machines might
have a graphical console of some sorts but FreeBSD has only been tested
on a serial console.

For serial console usage either change /etc/ttys to have:

    console "/usr/libexec/getty std.9600"   unknown   on secure

as the console entry, or add

    zs0     "/usr/libexec/getty std.9600"   unknown   on secure

For the AlphaServer 8x00 machines the kernel config file must contain:

    options    DEC_KN8AE   # Alpha 8200/8400 (Turbolaser)
    cpu EV5

Contrary to expectation there is no cpu EV6 defined for inclusion in the
kernel config file. The cpu EV5 is mandatory to keep config(8) happy.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.16. Alpha Processor Inc. UP1000

The UP1000 is an ATX mainboard based on the 21264a CPU which itself
lives in a Slot B module. It is normally housed in an ATX tower
enclosure.

Features:

-   21264a Alpha CPU at 600 or 700 MHz in a Slot B module (includes
    cooling fans)

-   memory bus: 128 bits to the L2 cache, 64 bits from Slot B to the
    AMD-751

-   on-board Bcache / L2 cache: 2MB (600Mhz) or 4MB (700Mhz)

-   AMD AMD-751 (``Irongate'') system controller chip

-   Acer Labs M1543C PCI-ISA bridge controller / super-IO chip

-   PS/2 mouse & keyboard port

-   memory: 168-pin PC100 unbuffered SDRAM DIMMS, 3 DIMM slots DIMM
    sizes supported are 64, 128 or 256 Mb in size

-   2 16550A serial port

-   1 ECP/EPP parallel port

-   floppy interface

-   2 embedded Ultra DMA33 IDE interface

-   2 USB ports

-   expansion:

    -   4 32 bit PCI slots

    -   2 ISA slots

    -   1 AGP slot

Slot B is a box-like enclosure that houses a daughter-board for the CPU
and cache. It has 2 small fans for cooling. Loud fans..

The machine needs ECC capable DIMMs, so 72 bit ones. This does not
appear to be documented in the UP1000 docs. The system accesses the
serial EEPROM on the DIMMs via the SM bus. Note that if only a single
DIMM is used it must be installed in slot 2. This is a bit
counter-intuitive.

The UP1000 needs a 400Watt ATX power supply according to the
manufacturer. This might be a bit overly conservative/pessimistic
judging from the power consumption of the board & cpu. But as always you
will have to take your expansion cards and peripherals into account. The
M1543C chip contains power management functionality & temperature
monitoring (via I2C / SM bus).

Chances are that your UP1000 comes by default with AlphaBios only. The
SRM console firmware is available from the Alpha Processor Inc. web
site. It is currently available in a beta version which was successfully
used during the port of FreeBSD to the UP1000.

The embedded Ultra DMA EIDE ports are bootable by the SRM console.

UP1000 SRM can boot off an Adaptec 294x adapter. Under high I/O load
conditions machine lockups have been observed using the Adaptec 294x. A
Symbios 875 based card works just fine, using the sym driver. Most
likely other cards based on the Symbios chips that the sym driver
supports will work as well.

The USB interfaces are disabled by the SRM console and have not (yet)
been tested with FreeBSD.

For the UP1000 the kernel config file must contain:

    options    API_UP1000  # UP1000, UP1100 (Nautilus)
    cpu EV5

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.17. Alpha Processor Inc. UP1100

The UP1100 is an ATX mainboard based on the 21264a CPU running at 600
MHz. It is normally housed in an ATX tower enclosure.

Features:

-   21264a Alpha EV6 CPU at 600 or 700 MHz

-   memory bus: 100MHz 64-bit (PC-100 SDRAM), 800 MB/s memory bandwidth

-   on-board Bcache / L2 cache: 2Mb

-   AMD AMD-751 (``Irongate'') system controller chip

-   Acer Labs M1535D PCI-ISA bridge controller / super-IO chip

-   PS/2 mouse & keyboard port

-   memory: 168-pin PC100 unbuffered SDRAM DIMMS, 3 DIMM slots DIMM
    sizes supported are 64, 128 or 256 Mb in size

-   2 16550A serial port

-   1 ECP/EPP parallel port

-   floppy interface

-   2 embedded Ultra DMA66 IDE interface

-   2 USB port

-   expansion: 3 32 bit PCI slots and 1 AGP2x slot

SRM console code comes standard with the UP1100. The SRM lives in
2Mbytes of flash ROM.

The machine needs ECC capable DIMMs, so 72 bit ones. This does not
appear to be documented in the UP1100 docs. The system accesses the
serial EEPROM on the DIMMs via the SM bus. Note that if only a single
DIMM is used it must be installed in slot 2. This is a bit
counter-intuitive.

The UP1100 needs a 400Watt ATX power supply according to the
manufacturer. This might be a bit overly conservative/pessimistic
judging from the power consumption of the board & cpu. But as always you
will have to take your expansion cards and peripherals into account. The
M1535D chip contains power management functionality & temperature
monitoring (via I2C / SM bus using a LM75 thermal sensor).

The UP1100 has an on-board 21143 10/100Mbit Ethernet interface.

The UP1100 is equipped with a SoundBlaster compatible audio interface.
Whether it works with FreeBSD is as of yet unknown.

The embedded Ultra DMA EIDE ports are bootable by the SRM console.

The UP1100 has 3 USB ports, 2 going external and one connected to the
AGP port.

For the UP1100 the kernel config file must contain:

    options    API_UP1000  # UP1000, UP1100 (Nautilus)
    cpu EV5

Contrary to expectation there is no cpu EV6 defined for inclusion in the
kernel config file. The cpu EV5 is mandatory to keep config(8) happy.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.18. Alpha Processor Inc. CS20, Compaq DS20L

The CS20 is a 19", 1U high rackmount server based on the 21264[ab] CPU.
It can have a maximum of 2 CPUs. Compaq sells the CS20 rebranded as the
AlphaServer DS20L. DS20L has 833MHz CPUs.

Features:

-   21264a Alpha CPU at 667 MHz or 21264b 833 MHz (max. 2 CPUs)

-   memory bus: 100MHz 256-bit wide

-   21271 Core Logic chipset (``Tsunami'')

-   Acer Labs M1533 PCI-ISA bridge controller / super-IO chip

-   PS/2 mouse & keyboard port

-   memory: 168-pin PC100 PLL buffered/registered SDRAM DIMMS, 8 DIMM
    slots, uses ECC memory, min 256 Mbytes / max 2 GBytes of memory

-   2 16550A serial port

-   1 ECP/EPP parallel port

-   ALI M1543C Ultra DMA66 IDE interface

-   embedded dual Intel 82559 10/100Mbit Ethernet

-   embedded Symbios 53C1000 Ultra160 SCSI controller

-   expansion: 2 64 bit PCI slots (2/3 length)

SRM console code comes standard with the CS20. The SRM lives in 2Mbytes
of flash ROM.

The CS20 needs ECC capable DIMMs. Note that it uses buffered DIMMs.

The CS20 has an I2C based internal monitoring system for things like
temperature, fans, voltages etc. The I2C also supports ``wake on LAN''.

Each PCI slot is connected to its own independent PCI bus on the
Tsunami.

The embedded Ultra DMA EIDE ports are bootable by the SRM console.

The CS20 has an embedded slim-line IDE CD drive. There is a
front-accessible bay for a 1" high 3.5" SCSI hard-disk drive with SCA
connector.

Note that there is no floppy disk drive (or a connector to add one).

The kernel config file must contain:

    options    DEC_ST6600
    cpu EV5

Contrary to expectation there is no cpu EV6 defined for inclusion in the
kernel config file. The cpu EV5 is mandatory to keep config(8) happy.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.19. Compaq AlphaServer ES40 (``Clipper'')

The ES40 is a SMP system that can have 1 - 4 21264 Alpha CPUs. With the
maximum configuration of 32GB of memory these systems are often deployed
as heavy database servers and are also found in HPTC compute farm
environments.

Features:

-   21264 Alpha CPU at 500 (EV6), 667 (EV67) or 833 MHz (EV68) (max. 4
    CPUs)

-   memory bus: 256-bit wide

-   21272 Core Logic chipset

-   PS/2 mouse & keyboard port

-   memory: 200-pin JEDEC standard SDRAM DIMMS, max 32 GBytes of memory

-   2 16550A serial port

-   1 ECP/EPP parallel port

-   ALI M1543C Ultra DMA66 IDE interface

-   expansion: 2 64 bit PCI buses

SRM console code comes standard with the ES40.

ES40 comes with an ATA CDROM drive, but uses SCSI harddisks. The usual
Symbios & Qlogic adapters are bootable, as is the KZPEA aka Adaptec
39160 dual channel LVD U160 adapter.

Memory is divided in 4 memory arrays which each contain a set of 4 SDRAM
DIMMs. Each DIMM is 72 bit wide and of the 100MHz speed variant. An
array can contain 2 sets, so 8 DIMMs max per array. The DIMMs live on
Memory Mother Boards (MMBs). There are 2 MMB models, with 4 and 8 DIMM
sockets respectively. Each MMB provides half of the 256 bit memory bus
width to the CPUs. Given the myriad options for the memory configuration
it is advisable to check the system documentation for the optimum memory
configuration.

Dependent on the model variation the ES40 has 6 or 10 64 bit PCI slots.
This is basically just means the same backplane with less connectors
mounted.

ES40 has the same RMC remote power control as DS10 and DS20. See the
description of the RMC in the DS10 section of this document. Most
variations of ES40 have multiple power supplies, allowing for N+1
redundancy. When installing CPU cards you must unplug all power cords,
the CPU cards receive standby power from the power supplies. Maximum
memory configurations need more than the default number of
powersupplies.

The kernel config file must contain:

    options   DEC_ST6600
    cpu     EV5

Contrary to expectation there is no cpu EV6 defined for inclusion in the
kernel config file. The cpu EV5 is mandatory to keep config(8) happy.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.4. Supported Hardware Overview

A word of caution: the installed base for FreeBSD is not nearly as large
as for FreeBSD/Intel. This means that the enormous variation of PCI/ISA
expansion cards out there has much less chance of having been tested on
alpha than on Intel. This is not to imply they are doomed to fail, just
that the chance of running into something never tested before is much
higher. GENERIC contains things that are known to work on Alpha only.

The PCI and ISA expansion busses are fully supported. Turbo Channel is
not in GENERIC and has limited support (see the relevant machine model
info). The MCA bus is not supported. The EISA bus is not supported for
use with EISA expansion cards as the EISA support code is lacking. ISA
cards in EISA slots are reported to work. The Compaq Qvision EISA VGA
card is driven in ISA mode and works OK as a console.

1.44 Mbyte and 1.2 Mbyte floppy drives are supported. 2.88 Mbyte drives
sometimes found in Alpha machines are supported up to 1.44Mbyte.

ATA and ATAPI (IDE) devices are supported via the ata(4) driver
framework. As most people run their Alphas with SCSI disks it is not as
well tested as SCSI. Be aware of boot-ability restrictions for IDE
disks. See the machine specific information.

There is full SCSI support via the CAM layer for Adaptec 2940x (AIC7xxx
chip-based), Qlogic family and Symbios. Those of you interested in U160
SCSI might want to take a look at an Adaptec 39160 dual channel LVD U160
adapter. Compaq calls this a KZPEA adapter. Recent Alpha models have SRM
versions that can boot from them. In general be aware of the
machine-specific boot-ability issues for the various adapter models.
Where known they are listed in the individual machine descriptions.

The Qlogic QL2x00 FibreChannel host adapters are fully supported.

If you want to boot your Alpha over the Ethernet you will obviously need
an Ethernet card that the SRM console recognizes. This generally means
you need a board with an 21x4x Ethernet chip as that is what Digital
used. These chips are driven by the FreeBSD de(4) (older driver) or
dc(4) (newer driver). Some new SRM versions are known to recognize the
Intel 8255x Ethernet chips as driven by the FreeBSD fxp(4) driver. But
beware: the fxp(4) driver is reported not to work correctly with FreeBSD
(although it works excellently on FreeBSD/x86).

DEC DEFPA PCI FDDI network adapters are supported on alpha.

In general the SRM console emulates a VGA-compatibility mode on PCI VGA
cards. This is, however, not guaranteed to work by Compaq/DEC for each
and every card type out there. When the SRM thinks the VGA is acceptable
FreeBSD will be able to use it. The console driver works just like on a
FreeBSD/intel machine. Please note that VESA modes are not supported on
Alpha, so that leaves you with 80x25 consoles.

In some Alpha machines you will find video adapters based on TGA chips.
The plain TGA adapter does not emulate VGA and is therefore not usable
for a FreeBSD console. TGA2 cards have a basic VGA compatibility mode
and work fine as FreeBSD consoles.

The ``PC standard'' serial ports found on most Alphas are supported.

ISDN (i4b) is not supported on FreeBSD/alpha.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.5. Acknowledgments

In compiling this file I used multiple information sources, but the
NetBSD Web site proved to be an invaluable source of information. If it
wasn't for NetBSD/alpha there probably would not be a FreeBSD/alpha in
the first place.

People who kindly helped me create this section:

-   Andrew Gallatin <gallatin@FreeBSD.org>

-   Chuck Robey <chuckr@FreeBSD.org>

-   Matthew Jacob <mjacob@FreeBSD.org>

-   Michael Smith <msmith@FreeBSD.org>

-   David O'Brien <obrien@FreeBSD.org>

-   Christian Weisgerber

-   Kazutaka YOKOTA

-   Nick Maniscalco

-   Eric Schnoebelen

-   Peter van Dijk

-   Peter Jeremy

-   Dolf de Waal

-   Wim Lemmers, ex-Compaq

-   Wouter Brackman, Compaq

-   Lodewijk van den Berg, Compaq

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3. ðÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/ru_RU.KOI8-R/hardware/common/dev.sgml,v
1.2.2.4.2.1 2005/04/26 06:38:34 den Exp $

÷ ÜÔÏÍ ÒÁÚÄÅÌÅ ÏÐÉÓÁÎÙ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ FreeBSD ÎÁ ÐÌÁÔÆÏÒÍÅ
Alpha/AXP. äÒÕÇÉÅ ËÏÎÆÉÇÕÒÁÃÉÉ ÔÁËÖÅ ÍÏÇÕÔ ÒÁÂÏÔÁÔØ, ÏÎÉ ÐÒÏÓÔÏ ÅÝÅ ÎÅ
ÂÙÌÉ ÐÒÏÔÅÓÔÉÒÏ×ÁÎÙ. ðÒÉ×ÅÔÓÔ×ÕÀÔÓÑ ÚÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÑ, ÏÂÎÏ×ÌÅÎÉÑ É ÉÓÐÒÁ×ÌÅÎÉÑ
ÜÔÏÇÏ ÓÐÉÓËÁ.

ëÏÇÄÁ ÜÔÏ ×ÏÚÍÏÖÎÏ, ÐÒÉ×ÏÄÉÔÓÑ ÓÐÉÓÏË ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏ× ÄÌÑ ËÁÖÄÏÇÏ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á
ÉÌÉ ËÌÁÓÓÁ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×. åÓÌÉ Õ ÜÔÏÇÏ ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÁ ÅÓÔØ ÓÔÒÁÎÉÃÁ ÓÐÒÁ×ÏÞÎÉËÁ ×
ÏÓÎÏ×ÎÏÊ ÐÏÓÔÁ×ËÅ FreeBSD (ÞÔÏ ×ÅÒÎÏ ÄÌÑ ÂÏÌØÛÉÎÓÔ×Á ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏ×), ÎÁ ÎÅÅ
ÄÁÅÔÓÑ ÓÓÙÌËÁ. éÎÆÏÒÍÁÃÉÑ ÐÏ ÏÐÒÅÄÅÌÅÎÎÙÍ ÍÏÄÅÌÑÍ ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÈ
ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×, ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÏ× É Ô.Ä. ÍÏÖÅÔ ÂÙÔØ ÎÁÊÄÅÎÁ × ÓÔÒÁÎÉÃÁÈ
ÓÐÒÁ×ÏÞÎÉËÁ.

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: óÐÉÓÏË ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ× × ÜÔÏÍ ÄÏËÕÍÅÎÔÅ ÇÅÎÅÒÉÒÕÅÔÓÑ
  Á×ÔÏÍÁÔÉÞÅÓËÉ ÉÚ ÓÔÒÁÎÉÃ ÓÐÒÁ×ÏÞÎÏÊ ÓÉÓÔÅÍÙ FreeBSD. üÔÏ ÏÚÎÁÞÁÅÔ, ÞÔÏ
  ÎÅËÏÔÏÒÙÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÎÅÓËÏÌØËÉÍÉ ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÁÍÉ, ÍÏÇÕÔ
  ÐÏÑ×ÌÑÔØÓÑ ÎÅÓËÏÌØËÏ ÒÁÚ.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.1. ëÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ ÄÉÓËÏ×

IDE/ATA ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ ata(4))

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ ahc(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÅ ÈÏÓÔ ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ SCSI É ËÁÒÔÙ
ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÏ× SCSI:

-   Adaptec AIC7770 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7850 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7860 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7870 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7880 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7890 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7891 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7892 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7895 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7896 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7897 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7899 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec 274X(W)

-   Adaptec 274X(T)

-   Adaptec 284X

-   Adaptec 2910

-   Adaptec 2915

-   Adaptec 2920

-   Adaptec 2930C

-   Adaptec 2930U2

-   Adaptec 2940

-   Adaptec 2940J

-   Adaptec 2940N

-   Adaptec 2940U

-   Adaptec 2940AU

-   Adaptec 2940UW

-   Adaptec 2940UW Dual

-   Adaptec 2940UW Pro

-   Adaptec 2940U2W

-   Adaptec 2940U2B

-   Adaptec 2950U2W

-   Adaptec 2950U2B

-   Adaptec 19160B

-   Adaptec 29160B

-   Adaptec 29160N

-   Adaptec 3940

-   Adaptec 3940U

-   Adaptec 3940AU

-   Adaptec 3940UW

-   Adaptec 3940AUW

-   Adaptec 3940U2W

-   Adaptec 3950U2

-   Adaptec 3960

-   Adaptec 39160

-   Adaptec 3985

-   Adaptec 4944UW

-   NEC PC-9821Xt13 (PC-98)

-   NEC RvII26 (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B02L/B09 (PC-98)

-   NEC SV-98/2-B03 (PC-98)

-   Many motherboards with on-board SCSI support

ëÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏÍ amr(4), ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-1E

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-2E

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-4E

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-0X

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-2X

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-4X

-   MegaRAID SATA 300-4X

-   MegaRAID SATA 300-8X

-   MegaRAID SATA 150-4

-   MegaRAID SATA 150-6

-   MegaRAID i4 133 RAID

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-0

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-1

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-2

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-4

-   MegaRAID Series 418

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1200 (Series 428)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1300 (Series 434)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1400 (Series 438)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1500 (Series 467)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1600 (Series 471)

-   MegaRAID Elite 1500 (Series 467)

-   MegaRAID Elite 1600 (Series 493)

-   MegaRAID Elite 1650 (Series 4xx)

-   MegaRAID Express 100 (Series 466WS)

-   MegaRAID Express 200 (Series 466)

-   MegaRAID Express 300 (Series 490)

-   MegaRAID Express 500 (Series 475)

-   Dell PERC

-   Dell PERC 2/SC

-   Dell PERC 2/DC

-   Dell PERC 3/DCL

-   Dell PERC 3/QC

-   Dell PERC 4/Di

-   Dell PERC 4e/Di

-   Dell PERC 4e/Si

-   Dell PERC 4ei

-   HP NetRAID-1/Si

-   HP NetRAID-3/Si (D4943A)

-   HP Embedded NetRAID

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCS16

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCU42X

  úÁÇÒÕÚËÁ Ó ÜÔÉÈ ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÏ× ÎÅ ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔÓÑ ×ÓÌÅÄÓÔ×ÉÅ ÏÇÒÁÎÉÞÅÎÉÊ
  SRM.

ëÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏÍ mlx(4), ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   Mylex DAC960P

-   Mylex DAC960PD / DEC KZPSC (Fast Wide)

-   Mylex DAC960PDU

-   Mylex DAC960PL

-   Mylex DAC960PJ

-   Mylex DAC960PG

-   Mylex DAC960PU / DEC PZPAC (Ultra Wide)

-   Mylex AcceleRAID 150 (DAC960PRL)

-   Mylex AcceleRAID 250 (DAC960PTL1)

-   Mylex eXtremeRAID 1100 (DAC1164P)

-   RAIDarray 230 controllers, aka the Ultra-SCSI DEC KZPAC-AA (1-ch,
    4MB cache), KZPAC-CA (3-ch, 4MB), KZPAC-CB (3-ch, 8MB cache)

All major firmware revisions (2.x, 3.x, 4.x and 5.x) are supported,
however it is always advisable to upgrade to the most recent firmware
available for the controller. Compatible Mylex controllers not listed
should work, but have not been verified.

  úÁÇÒÕÚËÁ Ó ÜÔÉÈ ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÏ× ÎÅ ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔÓÑ ×ÓÌÅÄÓÔ×ÉÅ ÏÇÒÁÎÉÞÅÎÉÊ
  SRM. DAC960 ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ, ÐÒÏÄÁ×ÁÅÍÙÅ Digital/Compaq ÄÌÑ ÓÉÓÔÅÍ Alpha ×
  ËÁÞÅÓÔ×Å ÞÁÓÔÉ StorageWorks family, Ô.Å. KZPSC ÉÌÉ KZPAC ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÀÔ
  ÚÁÇÒÕÚËÕ SRM. ïÂÒÁÔÉÔÅ ×ÎÉÍÁÎÉÅ, ÞÔÏ ÜÔÉ ËÁÒÔÙ ÉÓÐÏÌØÚÕÀÔ 2.x
  firmware. úÁÇÒÕÚËÁ SRM ÎÁ ÂÏÌÅÅ Ó×ÅÖÉÈ ×ÅÒÓÉÑÈ firmware ÎÅ
  ÐÒÏ×ÅÒÑÌÁÓØ.

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ ncr(4) ÐÒÅÄÏÓÔÁ×ÌÑÅÔ ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖËÕ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÈ ÎÁÂÏÒÏ× ÍÉËÒÏÓÈÅÍ
ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÏ× NCR/Symbios SCSI:

-   53C810

-   53C810A

-   53C815

-   53C820

-   53C825A

-   53C860

-   53C875

-   53C875J

-   53C885

-   53C895

-   53C895A

-   53C896

-   53C1510D

The following add-on boards are known to be supported:

-   I-O DATA SC-98/PCI (PC-98)

-   I-O DATA SC-PCI (PC-98)

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ sym(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÅ ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ Symbios/LSI Logic PCI
SCSI:

-   53C810

-   53C810A

-   53C815

-   53C825

-   53C825A

-   53C860

-   53C875

-   53C876

-   53C895

-   53C895A

-   53C896

-   53C897

-   53C1000

-   53C1000R

-   53C1010-33

-   53C1010-66

-   53C1510D

SCSI ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ sym(4), ÍÏÇÕÔ ÂÙÔØ ÉÌÉ ×ÓÔÒÏÅÎÙ ×
ÍÁÔÅÒÉÎÓËÕÀ ÐÌÁÔÕ, ÉÌÉ ÎÁÈÏÄÉÔØÓÑ ÎÁ ÏÄÎÏÊ ÉÚ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÈ ËÁÒÔÙ
ÒÁÓÛÉÒÅÎÉÑ:

-   ASUS SC-200, SC-896

-   Data Technology DTC3130 (all variants)

-   DawiControl DC2976UW

-   Diamond FirePort (all)

-   I-O DATA SC-UPCI (PC-98)

-   Logitec LHA-521UA (PC-98)

-   NCR cards (all)

-   Symbios cards (all)

-   Tekram DC390W, 390U, 390F, 390U2B, 390U2W, 390U3D, and 390U3W

-   Tyan S1365

ëÁÒÔÙ, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏÍ isp(4), ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   ISP1000

-   PTI SBS440

-   ISP1020

-   ISP1040

-   PTI SBS450

-   Qlogic 1240

-   Qlogic 1020

-   Qlogic 1040

-   Qlogic 1080

-   Qlogic 1280

-   Qlogic 12160

-   Qlogic 2100

-   Qlogic 2102

-   Qlogic 2200

-   Qlogic 2202

-   Qlogic 2204

-   Qlogic 2300

-   Qlogic 2312

-   PTI SBS470

-   Antares P-0033

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏÍ mpt(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÀÔÓÑ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÅ ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ:

-   LSI Logic 53c1030 (Dual Ultra320 SCSI)

-   LSI Logic FC909 (1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC909A (Dual 1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC919 (2Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC929, LSI Logic FC929X (Dual 2Gb/s Fibre Channel)

íÉËÒÏÓÈÅÍÙ SCSI ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÁ, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏÍ mpt(4), ÍÏÇÕÔ ÂÙÔØ
×ÓÔÒÏÅÎÙ ×Ï ÍÎÏÇÉÅ ÓÉÓÔÅÍÙ, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   Dell PowerEdge 1750

-   IBM eServer xSeries 335

óÏ ×ÓÅÍÉ ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÍÉ SCSI ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÁÍÉ, ÐÒÅÄÏÓÔÁ×ÌÅÎÁ ÐÏÌÎÁÑ
ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖËÁ ÐÅÒÉÆÅÒÉÉ SCSI-I, SCSI-II É SCSI-III, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ ÖÅÓÔËÉÅ ÄÉÓËÉ,
ÏÐÔÉÞÅÓËÉÅ ÄÉÓËÉ, ÌÅÎÔÏÞÎÙÅ ÎÁËÏÐÉÔÅÌÉ (×ËÌÀÞÁÑ DAT, 8mm Exabyte,
Mammoth, É DLT), ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á ÓÍÅÎÙ ÎÏÓÉÔÅÌÅÊ, ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á ÏÂÒÁÂÏÔËÉ É
ÐÒÉ×ÏÄÙ CD-ROM. WORM ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÀÝÉÅ ËÏÍÁÎÄÙ CD-ROM,
ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÀÔÓÑ Ó ÄÏÓÔÕÐÏÍ ÔÏÌØËÏ ÄÌÑ ÞÔÅÎÉÑ ÐÒÉ×ÏÄÁÍÉ CD-ROM (ÔÁËÉÍÉ ËÁË
cd(4)). ðÏÄÄÅÒÖËÁ ÚÁÐÉÓÉ WORM/CD-R/CD-RW ÐÒÅÄÏÓÔÁ×ÌÑÅÔÓÑ cdrecord(1),
ËÏÔÏÒÙÊ Ñ×ÌÑÅÔÓÑ ÞÁÓÔØÀ ÐÏÒÔÁ sysutils/cdrtools ÉÚ ËÏÌÌÅËÃÉÉ ÐÏÒÔÏ×.

îÁ ÄÁÎÎÙÊ ÍÏÍÅÎÔ ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÀÔÓÑ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÅ ÓÉÓÔÅÍÙ CD-ROM ÔÉÐÁ:

-   SCSI ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓ (ÔÁËÖÅ ×ËÌÀÞÁÀÝÉÊ ProAudio Spectrum É SoundBlaster
    SCSI) (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ cd(4))

-   ATAPI IDE ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ acd(4))

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.2. Ethernet ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

áÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏÍ sf(4), ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   ANA-62011 64-bit single port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62022 64-bit dual port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62044 64-bit quad port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-69011 32-bit single port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62020 64-bit single port 100baseFX adapter

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ pcn(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ É ×ÓÔÒÏÅÎÎÙÅ ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ,
ÏÓÎÏ×ÁÎÎÙÅ ÎÁ ÍÉËÒÏÓÈÅÍÁÈ AMD PCnet/FAST, PCnet/FAST+, PCnet/FAST III,
PCnet/PRO É PCnet/Home Fast Ethernet:

-   AMD Am53C974/Am79C970/Am79C974 PCnet-PCI

-   AMD Am79C970A PCnet-PCI II

-   AMD Am79C971 PCnet-FAST

-   AMD Am79C972 PCnet-FAST+

-   AMD Am79C973/Am79C975 PCnet-FAST III

-   AMD Am79C976 PCnet-PRO

-   AMD PCnet/Home HomePNA

-   Allied-Telesis LA-PCI

-   Contec C-NET(98)S (PC-98)

-   NEC SV-98/2-B05, B06

áÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏÍ rl(4), ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   Accton ``Cheetah'' EN1207D (MPX 5030/5038; RealTek 8139 clone)

-   Allied Telesyn AT2550

-   Allied Telesyn AT2500TX

-   Belkin F5D5000

-   BUFFALO (Melco INC.) LPC-CB-CLX (CardBus)

-   Compaq HNE-300

-   CompUSA no-name 10/100 PCI Ethernet NIC

-   Corega FEther CB-TXD

-   Corega FEtherII CB-TXD

-   D-Link DFE-528TX

-   D-Link DFE-530TX+

-   D-Link DFE-538TX

-   D-Link DFE-690TXD

-   Edimax EP-4103DL CardBus

-   Encore ENL832-TX 10/100 M PCI

-   Farallon NetLINE 10/100 PCI

-   Genius GF100TXR,

-   GigaFast Ethernet EE100-AXP

-   KTX-9130TX 10/100 Fast Ethernet

-   LevelOne FPC-0106TX

-   Longshine LCS-8038TX-R

-   NDC Communications NE100TX-E

-   Netronix Inc. EA-1210 NetEther 10/100

-   Nortel Networks 10/100BaseTX

-   OvisLink LEF-8129TX

-   OvisLink LEF-8139TX

-   Peppercon AG ROL-F

-   Planex FNW-3800-TX

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 PCI 1211-TX

-   SOHO (PRAGMATIC) UE-1211C

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ wb(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÏÓÎÏ×ÁÎÎÙÅ ÎÁ Winbond W89C840F ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ É
×ÓÔÒÏÅÎÎÙÅ ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ Fast Ethernet, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   Trendware TE100-PCIE

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ vr(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÏÓÎÏ×ÁÎÎÙÅ ÎÁ VIA Technologies Rhine I, Rhine
II, É Rhine III ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ Fast Ethernet, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   D-Link DFE530-TX

-   Hawking Technologies PN102TX

-   AOpen/Acer ALN-320

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ sis(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÏÓÎÏ×ÁÎÎÙÅ ÎÁ Silicon Integrated Systems SiS
900 É SiS 7016 ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ Fast Ethernet É ×ÓÔÒÏÅÎÎÙÅ ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ, ËÁË É
ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ Fast Ethernet, ÏÓÎÏ×ÁÎÎÙÅ ÎÁ ÍÉËÒÏÓÈÅÍÅ National Semiconductor
DP83815 (MacPhyter). ðÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ ×ËÌÀÞÁÀÔ:

-   @Nifty FNECHARD IFC USUP-TX

-   MELCO LGY-PCI-TXC

-   Netgear FA311-TX (DP83815)

-   Netgear FA312-TX (DP83815)

-   SiS 630, 635, and 735 motherboard chipsets

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ nge(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÏÓÎÏ×ÁÎÎÙÅ ÎÁ National Semiconductor DP83820
É DP83821 ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ Gigabit Ethernet, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   SMC EZ Card 1000 (SMC9462TX)

-   D-Link DGE-500T

-   Asante FriendlyNet GigaNIX 1000TA and 1000TPC

-   Addtron AEG320T

-   LinkSys EG1032 (32-bit PCI) and EG1064 (64-bit PCI)

-   Surecom Technology EP-320G-TX

-   Netgear GA622T

-   Netgear GA621

-   Ark PC SOHO-GA2500T (32-bit PCI) and SOHO-GA2000T (64-bit PCI)

-   Trendware TEG-PCITX (32-bit PCI) and TEG-PCITX2 (64-bit PCI)

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ ste(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÏÓÎÏ×ÁÎÎÙÅ ÎÁ Sundance Technologies ST201
ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ É ×ÓÔÒÏÅÎÎÙÅ ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ Fast Ethernet, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   D-Link DFE-530TXS

-   D-Link DFE-550TX

-   D-Link DFE-580TX

áÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏÍ sk(4), ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   3Com 3C940 single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   Belkin F5D5005 single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   Linksys EG1032 single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9521 SK-NET GE-T single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9821 SK-NET GE-T single port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9822 SK-NET GE-T dual port, 1000baseT adapter

-   SK-9841 SK-NET GE-LX single port, single mode fiber adapter

-   SK-9842 SK-NET GE-LX dual port, single mode fiber adapter

-   SK-9843 SK-NET GE-SX single port, multimode fiber adapter

-   SK-9844 SK-NET GE-SX dual port, multimode fiber adapter

-   SMC 9452TX single port, 1000baseT adapter

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ tl(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÏÓÎÏ×ÁÎÎÙÅ ÎÁ Texas Instruments ThunderLAN
ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ Ethernet É Fast Ethernet, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ ÂÏÌØÛÏÅ ËÏÌÉÞÅÓÔ×Ï ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÏ×
Compaq PCI Ethernet. ôÁËÖÅ ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÀÔÓÑ:

-   Olicom OC-2135/2138 10/100 TX UTP adapter

-   Olicom OC-2325/OC-2326 10/100 TX UTP adapter

-   Racore 8148 10baseT/100baseTX/100baseFX adapter

-   Racore 8165 10/100baseTX adapter

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ tl(4) ÔÁËÖÅ ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ×ÓÔÒÏÅÎÎÙÅ ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ Ethernet ×
ÒÁÚÌÉÞÎÙÈ ÓÅÒ×ÅÒÁÈ Compaq Prosignia É ÎÁÓÔÏÌØÎÙÈ ËÏÍÐØÀÔÅÒÁÈ Compaq
Deskpro, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   Compaq Netelligent 10

-   Compaq Netelligent 10 T PCI UTP/Coax

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 Dual-Port

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 Proliant

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 TX Embedded UTP

-   Compaq Netelligent 10/100 TX UTP

-   Compaq NetFlex 3P

-   Compaq NetFlex 3P Integrated

-   Compaq NetFlex 3P w/BNC

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ dc(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÅ ÎÁÂÏÒÙ ÍÉËÒÏÓÈÅÍ:

-   DEC/Intel 21143

-   ADMtek AL981 Comet, AN985 Centaur, ADM9511 Centaur II and ADM9513
    Centaur II

-   ASIX Electronics AX88140A and AX88141

-   Conexant LANfinity RS7112 (miniPCI)

-   Davicom DM9009, DM9100, DM9102 and DM9102A

-   Lite-On 82c168 and 82c169 PNIC

-   Lite-On/Macronix 82c115 PNIC II

-   Macronix 98713, 98713A, 98715, 98715A, 98715AEC-C, 98725, 98727 and
    98732

-   Xircom X3201 (cardbus only)

óÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÅ ÓÅÔÅ×ÙÅ ËÁÒÔÙ ÒÁÂÏÔÁÀÔ Ó ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏÍ dc(4):

-   3Com OfficeConnect 10/100B (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Abocom FE2500

-   Accton EN1217 (98715A)

-   Accton EN2242 MiniPCI

-   Adico AE310TX (98715A)

-   Alfa Inc GFC2204 (ASIX AX88140A)

-   Built in 10Mbps only Ethernet on Compaq Presario 7900 series
    desktops (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in DE500-BA on DEC Alpha workstations (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in Sun DMFE 10/100 Mbps Ethernet on Sun Netra X1 and Sun Fire
    V100 (DM9102A, MII)

-   Built in Ethernet on LinkSys EtherFast 10/100 Instant GigaDrive
    (DM9102, MII)

-   CNet Pro110B (ASIX AX88140A)

-   CNet Pro120A (98715A or 98713A) and CNet Pro120B (98715)

-   Compex RL100-TX (98713 or 98713A)

-   D-Link DFE-570TX (21143, MII, quad port)

-   Digital DE500-BA 10/100 (21143, non-MII)

-   ELECOM Laneed LD-CBL/TXA (ADMtek AN985)

-   Hawking CB102 CardBus

-   IBM EtherJet Cardbus Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 Mobile Cardbus (versions that use the X3201 chipset)

-   Jaton XpressNet (Davicom DM9102)

-   Kingston KNE100TX (21143, MII)

-   Kingston KNE110TX (PNIC 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v2.0 (PNIC II 82c115)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v4.0/4.1 (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Matrox FastNIC 10/100 (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   Melco LGY-PCI-TXL

-   Microsoft MN-120 10/100 CardBus (ADMTek Centaur-C)

-   Microsoft MN-130 10/100 PCI (ADMTek Centaur-P)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A (98713A)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A Rev B4 (98715AEC-C)

-   NetGear FA310-TX Rev. D1, D2 or D3 (PNIC 82c169)

-   Netgear FA511

-   PlaneX FNW-3602-T (ADMtek AN985)

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 1233A-TX (ADMtek AN985)

-   SVEC PN102-TX (98713)

-   Xircom Cardbus Realport

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet 10/100

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet II 10/100

áÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏÍ de(4), ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   Adaptec ANA-6944/TX

-   Cogent EM100FX and EM440TX

-   Corega FastEther PCI-TX

-   D-Link DFE-500TX

-   DEC DE435, DE425, DEC DE450, and DEC DE500

-   ELECOM LD-PCI2T, LD-PCITS

-   I-O DATA LA2/T-PCI

-   SMC Etherpower 8432, 9332 and 9334

-   ZNYX ZX3xx

áÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏÍ fxp(4), ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   Intel EtherExpress PRO/10

-   Intel InBusiness 10/100

-   Intel PRO/100B / EtherExpressPRO/100 B PCI Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100+ Management Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 VE Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 M Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 S Desktop, Server and Dual-Port Server Adapters

-   Contec C-NET(PI)-100TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821Ra20, Rv20, Xv13, Xv20 internal 100Base-TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B06 (PC-98)

-   Many on-board network interfaces on Intel motherboards

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ xl(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÅÅ ÏÂÏÒÕÄÏ×ÁÎÉÅ:

-   3Com 3c900-TPO

-   3Com 3c900-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905-TX

-   3Com 3c905-T4

-   3Com 3c900B-TPO

-   3Com 3c900B-TPC

-   3Com 3c900B-FL

-   3Com 3c900B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905B-T4

-   3Com 3c905B-TX

-   3Com 3c905B-FX

-   3Com 3c905B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905C-TX

-   3Com 3c980, 3c980B, and 3c980C server adapters

-   3Com 3cSOHO100-TX OfficeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c450 HomeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c555, 3c556 and 3c556B mini-PCI adapters

-   3Com 3C3SH573BT, 3C575TX, 3CCFE575BT, 3CXFE575BT, 3CCFE575CT,
    3CXFE575CT, 3CCFEM656, 3CCFEM656B, and 3CCFEM656C, 3CXFEM656,
    3CXFEM656B, and 3CXFEM656C CardBus adapters

-   3Com 3c905-TX, 3c905B-TX 3c905C-TX, 3c920B-EMB, and 3c920B-EMB-WNM
    embedded adapters

óÅÍÅÊÓÔ×Á 3C656 ËÁÒÔ CardBus É 3C556 ËÁÒÔ MiniPCI ÉÍÅÀÔ ×ÓÔÒÏÅÎÎÕÀ
ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖËÕ ÐÒÏÐÒÉÅÔÁÒÎÏÇÏ ÍÏÄÅÍÁ. îÉ ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ xl(4), ÎÉ ËÁËÏÊ-ÌÉÂÏ ÄÒÕÇÏÊ
ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ ÎÅ ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÀÔ ÜÔÏÔ ÍÏÄÅÍ.

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ txp(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÅ ËÁÒÔÙ:

-   3Com 3CR990-TX-95

-   3Com 3CR990-TX-97

-   3Com 3cR990B-TXM

-   3Com 3CR990SVR95

-   3Com 3CR990SVR97

-   3Com 3cR990B-SRV

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ em(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ Gigabit Ethernet ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ, ÏÓÎÏ×ÁÎÎÙÅ ÎÁ
ÍÉËÒÏÓÈÅÍÁÈ ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÁ Intel 82540, 82541ER, 82541PI, 82542, 82543,
82544, 82545, 82546, 82546EB, 82546GB É 82547:

-   Intel PRO/1000 CT Network Connection (82547)

-   Intel PRO/1000 F Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 Gigabit Server Adapter (82542)

-   Intel PRO/1000 GT Desktop Adapter (82541PI)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Dual Port Server Adapter (82546)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Server Adapter (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Server Adapter (LX) (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Desktop Adapter (82540)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Desktop Adapter (82541)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Dual Port Server Adapter (82546)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Quad Port Server Adapter (82546EB)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Server Adapter (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Desktop Adapter (82544)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 XF Server Adapter (82544)

-   Intel PRO/1000 XT Server Adapter (82544)

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ gx(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ Gigabit Ethernet ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ, ÏÓÎÏ×ÁÎÎÙÅ ÎÁ
ÍÉËÒÏÓÈÅÍÁÈ ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÏ× Intel 82542 É 82543:

-   Intel PRO/1000 Gigabit Server Adapter (82542)

-   Intel PRO/1000 F Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Server Adapter (82543)

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ hme(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ×ÓÔÒÏÅÎÎÙÅ Ethernet ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ ÍÎÏÇÉÈ
ÒÁÂÏÞÉÈ ÓÔÁÎÃÉÊ É ÓÅÒ×ÅÒÏ× Sun UltraSPARC. ëÁÒÔÙ, ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÙÅ
ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒÏÍ hme(4), ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   Sun PCI SunSwift Adapter

-   Sun SBus SunSwift Adapter ``( hme'' and ``SUNW,hme'')

-   Sun PCI Sun100BaseT Adapter 2.0

-   Sun SBus Sun100BaseT 2.0

-   Sun PCI Quad FastEthernet Controller

-   Sun SBus Quad FastEthernet Controller

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ re(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÏÓÎÏ×ÁÎÎÙÅ ÎÁ RealTek RTL8139C+, RTL8169,
RTL8169S É RTL8110S ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ Fast Ethernet É Gigabit Ethernet, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   Alloy Computer Products EtherGOLD 1439E 10/100 (8139C+)

-   Compaq Evo N1015v Integrated Ethernet (8139C+)

-   Corega CG-LAPCIGT Gigabit Ethernet (8169S)

-   Gigabyte 7N400 Pro2 Integrated Gigabit Ethernet (8110S)

-   LevelOne GNC-0105T (8169S)

-   PLANEX COMMUNICATIONS Inc. GN-1200TC (8169S)

-   Xterasys XN-152 10/100/1000 NIC (8169)

<<<<<<< HEAD

3.3. Token Ring ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.3. Token Ring ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.4. FDDI ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

DEC DEFPA PCI (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ fpa(4))

<<<<<<< HEAD

3.5. ATM ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ


3.6. âÅÓÐÒÏ×ÏÄÎÙÅ ÓÅÔÅ×ÙÅ ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ


3.7. òÁÚÌÉÞÎÙÅ ÓÅÔÅ×ÙÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á


3.8. ISDN ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.5. ATM ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.6. âÅÓÐÒÏ×ÏÄÎÙÅ ÓÅÔÅ×ÙÅ ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.7. òÁÚÌÉÞÎÙÅ ÓÅÔÅ×ÙÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.8. ISDN ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.9. ðÏÓÌÅÄÏ×ÁÔÅÌØÎÙÅ ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ

``PC standard'' 8250, 16450, É 16550 ÐÏÓÌÅÄÏ×ÁÔÅÌØÎÙÅ ÐÏÒÔÙ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ
sio(4))

ðÏÓÌÅÄÏ×ÁÔÅÌØÎÁÑ ËÁÒÔÁ AST ÎÁ 4 ÐÏÒÔÁ Ó ÓÏ×ÍÅÓÔÎÙÍ ÉÓÐÏÌØÚÏ×ÁÎÉÅÍ IRQ

Comtrol Rocketport ËÁÒÔÁ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ rp(4))

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.10. áÕÄÉÏ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ snd_sbc(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÅ Ú×ÕËÏ×ÙÅ ËÁÒÔÙ:

-   Advance Asound 100 and 110

-   Creative SB16, SB32, SB AWE64 (including Gold) and ViBRA16

-   ESS ES1868, ES1869, ES1879 and ES1888

-   Logic ALS120

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ snd_maestro(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÅ Ú×ÕËÏ×ÙÅ ËÁÒÔÙ PCI:

-   ESS Technology Maestro-1

-   ESS Technology Maestro-2

-   ESS Technology Maestro-2E

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ snd_maestro3(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÅ Ú×ÕËÏ×ÙÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á:

-   ESS Technology Allegro-1

-   ESS Technology Maestro3

MSS/WSS Compatible DSPs (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ pcm(4))

<<<<<<< HEAD

3.11. ëÁÍÅÒÙ É ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á ×ÉÄÅÏÚÁÈ×ÁÔÁ

=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.11. ëÁÍÅÒÙ É ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á ×ÉÄÅÏÚÁÈ×ÁÔÁ

------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.12. õÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á USB

ðÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔÓÑ ÂÏÌØÛÏÊ ÄÉÁÐÁÚÏÎ USB ÐÅÒÉÆÅÒÉÉ; ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á,
ÒÁÂÏÔÏÓÐÏÓÏÂÎÏÓÔØ ËÏÔÏÒÙÈ ÉÚ×ÅÓÔÎÁ, ÐÒÉ×ÅÄÅÎÙ × ÜÔÏÍ ÒÁÚÄÅÌÅ. ÷ÓÌÅÄÓÔ×ÉÅ
ÐÒÏÓÔÏÊ ÁÒÈÉÔÅËÔÕÒÙ ÂÏÌØÛÉÎÓÔ×Á USB ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×, ÚÁ ÒÅÄËÉÍÉ ÉÓËÌÀÞÅÎÉÑÍÉ
ÌÀÂÏÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Ï ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÍÏÇÏ ËÌÁÓÓÁ ÂÕÄÅÔ ÒÁÂÏÔÁÔØ, ÄÁÖÅ ÅÓÌÉ ÏÎÏ
Ñ×ÎÏ ÎÅ ÐÒÉ×ÅÄÅÎÏ ÚÄÅÓØ.

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: USB Ethernet ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ ÍÏÇÕÔ ÂÙÔØ ÎÁÊÄÅÎÙ × ÒÁÚÄÅÌÅ Ethernet
  ÉÎÔÅÒÆÅÊÓÙ.

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: USB Bluetooth ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ ÍÏÇÕÔ ÂÙÔØ ÎÁÊÄÅÎÙ × ÒÁÚÄÅÌÅ
  Bluetooth.

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ ohci(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ×ÓÅ ÓÏ×ÍÅÓÔÉÍÙÅ Ó OHCI v1.0 ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ,
×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   AcerLabs M5237 (Aladdin-V)

-   AMD-756

-   OPTi 82C861 (FireLink)

-   NEC uPD 9210

-   CMD Tech 670 (USB0670)

-   CMD Tech 673 (USB0673)

-   NVIDIA nForce3

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ uhci(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ×ÓÅ UHCI v1.1 ÓÏ×ÍÅÓÔÉÍÙÅ ËÏÎÔÒÏÌÌÅÒÙ,
×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   Intel 82371AB/EB (PIIX4)

-   Intel 82371SB (PIIX3)

-   VIA 83C572

ëÏÎÃÅÎÔÒÁÔÏÒÙ

ëÌÁ×ÉÁÔÕÒÙ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ ukbd(4))

íÙÛØ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ ums(4))

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ ulpt(4) ÐÒÅÄÏÓÔÁ×ÌÑÅÔ ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖËÕ USB ÐÒÉÎÔÅÒÏ× É ÐÅÒÅÈÏÄÎÙÈ
ËÁÂÅÌÅÊ ÐÁÒÁÌÌÅÌØÎÙÈ ÐÒÉÎÔÅÒÏ×, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÅ:

-   ATen parallel printer adapter

-   Belkin F5U002 parallel printer adapter

-   Canon BJ F850, S600

-   Canon LBP-1310, 350

-   Entrega USB-to-parallel printer adapter

-   Hewlett-Packard HP Deskjet 3420 (P/N: C8947A #ABJ)

-   Oki Data MICROLINE ML660PS

-   Seiko Epson PM-900C, 880C, 820C, 730C

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ umct(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÓÌÅÄÕÀÝÉÅ ÁÄÁÐÔÅÒÙ:

-   Belkin F5U109

-   Belkin F5U409

-   D-Link DU-H3SP USB BAY Hub

-   Magic Control Technology USB-232

-   Sitecom USB-232

äÒÁÊ×ÅÒ umass(4) ÐÏÄÄÅÒÖÉ×ÁÅÔ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á USB Mass Storage, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   ADTEC Stick Drive AD-UST32M, 64M, 128M, 256M

-   Denno FireWire/USB2 Removable 2.5-inch HDD Case MIFU-25CB20

-   FujiFilm Zip USB Drive ZDR100 USB A

-   GREEN HOUSE USB Flash Memory "PicoDrive" GH-UFD32M, 64M, 128M

-   IBM 32MB USB Memory Key (P/N 22P5296)

-   IBM 256MB USB Drive (MSYSTEM DiskOnKey2)

-   IBM ThinkPad USB Portable CD-ROM Drive (P/N 33L5151)

-   I-O DATA USB CD/CD-R/CD-RW/DVD-R/DVD-RW/DVD-RAM/DVD-ROM Drive
    DVR-iUH2 (CDROM, DVD-RAM only)

-   I-O DATA USB x6 CD-RW Drive CDRW-i64/USB (CDROM only)

-   I-O DATA USB/IEEE1394 Portable HD Drive HDP-i30P/CI, HDP-i40P/CI

-   Iomega USB Zip 100/250 drive

-   Iomega Zip750 USB2.0 drive

-   Keian USB1.1/2.0 3.5-inch HDD Case KU350A

-   Kurouto Shikou USB 2.5-inch HDD Case GAWAP2.5PS-USB2.0

-   LaCie P3 HardDrive USB 200GB

-   Logitec LDR-H443U2 DVD-RAM/-R/+R/-RW/+RW drive

-   Logitec Mobile USB Memory LMC-256UD

-   Logitec USB1.1/2.0 HDD Unit SHD-E60U2

-   Logitec USB Double-Speed Floppy Drive LFD-31U2

-   Logitec USB/IEEE1394 DVD-RAM/R/RW Unit LDR-N21FU2 (CDROM only)

-   MELCO USB Flash Disk "ClipDrive", RUF-C32M, -C64M, -C128M, -C256M,
    -C512M

-   MELCO USB Flash Disk "PetitDrive", RUF-32M, -64M, -128M, -256Mm

-   MELCO USB2.0 Flash Disk "PetitDrive2", RUF-256M/U2, -512M/U2

-   MELCO USB2.0 MO Drive MO-CH640U2

-   Matshita CF-VFDU03 floppy drive

-   Microtech International, Inc. USB-SCSI-HD 50 USB to SCSI cable

-   NOVAC USB2.0 2.5/3.5-inch HDD Case NV-HD351U

-   PNY Attache Flash Drive

-   Panasonic ("Matshita FDD CF-VFDU03")

-   Panasonic KXL-CB20AN Portable DVD-ROM/CD-R/RW

-   Panasonic KXL-CB35AN (DVD-ROM & CD-R/RW)

-   Panasonic USB2.0 Portable CD-RW Drive KXL-RW40AN (CDROM only)

-   Panasonic floppy drive

-   RATOC Systems USB2.0 Removable HDD Case U2-MDK1, U2-MDK1B

-   SanDisk SDDR-31 (Compact Flash)

-   SanDisk SDDR-75 (only Compact Flash port works)

-   Sitecom CN-300 MultiFlash (MMC/SD, SmartMedia, CF, MemoryStick)

-   Sony Portable CD-R/RW Drive CRX10U (CDROM only)

-   TEAC Portable USB CD-ROM Unit CD-110PU/210PU

-   Trek Thumbdrive 8MB

-   VAIO floppy drive (includes Y-E Data Flashbuster-U)

-   Y-E Data floppy drive (720/1.44/2.88Mb)

Among the supported digital cameras are:

-   Asahi Optical (PENTAX) Optio 230 & 330

<<<<<<< HEAD

3.13. IEEE 1394 (Firewire) ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á


3.14. Bluetooth ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á


3.15. ëÒÉÐÔÏÇÒÁÆÉÞÅÓËÉÅ ÁËÓÅÌÅÒÁÔÏÒÙ

=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.13. IEEE 1394 (Firewire) ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.14. Bluetooth ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.15. ëÒÉÐÔÏÇÒÁÆÉÞÅÓËÉÅ ÁËÓÅÌÅÒÁÔÏÒÙ

------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3.16. äÒÕÇÉÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

ðÒÉ×ÏÄÙ ÇÉÂËÉÈ ÄÉÓËÏ× (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ fdc(4))

VGA-ÓÏ×ÍÅÓÔÉÍÙÅ ×ÉÄÅÏËÁÒÔÙ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ vga(4))

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: éÎÆÏÒÍÁÃÉÑ, ÏÔÎÏÓÑÝÁÑÓÑ Ë ÏÔÄÅÌØÎÙÍ ×ÉÄÅÏËÁÒÔÁÍ É
  ÓÏ×ÍÅÓÔÉÍÏÓÔÉ Ó Xorg, ÍÏÖÅÔ ÂÙÔØ ÎÁÊÄÅÎÁ ÎÁ http://www.x.org/.

ëÌÁ×ÉÁÔÕÒÙ, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   AT ËÌÁ×ÉÁÔÕÒÙ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ atkbd(4))

-   PS/2 ËÌÁ×ÉÁÔÕÒÙ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ atkbd(4))

-   USB ËÌÁ×ÉÁÔÕÒÙ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ ukbd(4))

ëÕÒÓÏÒÎÙÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ:

-   PS/2 ÍÙÛØ É ÓÏ×ÍÅÓÔÉÍÙÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á, ×ËÌÀÞÁÑ ÍÎÏÇÉÅ ËÕÒÓÏÒÎÙÅ
    ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á ÎÁ ÌÜÐÔÏÐÁÈ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ psm(4))

-   ðÏÓÌÅÄÏ×ÁÔÅÌØÎÁÑ ÍÙÛØ É ÓÏ×ÍÅÓÔÉÍÙÅ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ×Á

-   USB ÍÙÛØ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ ums(4))

  úÁÍÅÞÁÎÉÅ: îÁ ÓÔÒÁÎÉÃÅ moused(8) ÎÁÈÏÄÉÔÓÑ ÄÏÐÏÌÎÉÔÅÌØÎÁÑ ÉÎÆÏÒÍÁÃÉÑ
  ÐÏ ÉÓÐÏÌØÚÏ×ÁÎÉÀ ËÕÒÓÏÒÎÙÈ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ× × FreeBSD. éÎÆÏÒÍÁÃÉÑ ÐÏ
  ÉÓÐÏÌØÚÏ×ÁÎÉÀ ËÕÒÓÏÒÎÙÈ ÕÓÔÒÏÊÓÔ× Ó Xorg ÍÏÖÅÔ ÂÙÔØ ÎÁÊÄÅÎÁ ÐÏ ÁÄÒÅÓÕ
  http://www.x.org/.

``PC standard'' ÐÁÒÁÌÌÅÌØÎÙÅ ÐÏÒÔÙ (ÄÒÁÊ×ÅÒ ppc(4))

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

üÔÏÔ ÆÁÊÌ É ÄÒÕÇÉÅ ÄÏËÕÍÅÎÔÙ, ÏÔÎÏÓÑÝÉÅÓÑ Ë ÄÁÎÎÏÊ ×ÅÒÓÉÉ FreeBSD, ÍÏÇÕÔ
ÂÙÔØ ÎÁÊÄÅÎÙ ÐÏ ÁÄÒÅÓÕ ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

åÓÌÉ Õ ×ÁÓ ×ÏÚÎÉË ×ÏÐÒÏÓ, ËÁÓÁÀÝÉÊÓÑ FreeBSD, ÐÒÏÞÔÉÔÅ ÄÏËÕÍÅÎÔÁÃÉÀ,
ÐÒÅÖÄÅ ÞÅÍ ÎÁÐÉÓÁÔØ ÐÉÓØÍÏ × <questions@FreeBSD.org>.

÷ÓÅÍ ÐÏÌØÚÏ×ÁÔÅÌÑÍ FreeBSD 5-STABLE ÒÅËÏÍÅÎÄÕÅÔÓÑ ÐÏÄÐÉÓÁÔØÓÑ ÎÁ ÓÐÉÓÏË
ÒÁÓÓÙÌËÉ <stable@FreeBSD.org>.

÷ÏÐÒÏÓÙ, ËÁÓÁÀÝÉÅÓÑ ÜÔÏÇÏ ÄÏËÕÍÅÎÔÁ, ×Ù ÍÏÖÅÔÅ ÎÁÐÒÁ×ÉÔØ ÐÏ ÁÄÒÅÓÕ
<doc@FreeBSD.org>.
