[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

Â 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 12.0-RELEASE Release Notes

Abstract

The release notes for FreeBSD 12.0-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system on the 12-STABLE development
line. This document lists applicable security advisories that were
issued since the last release, as well as significant changes to the
FreeBSD kernel and userland. Some brief remarks on upgrading are also
presented.

Table of Contents

-   Introduction

-   Upgrading from Previous Releases of FreeBSD

-   Security and Errata

    -   Security Advisories

    -   Errata Notices

-   Userland

    -   Userland Configuration Changes

    -   Userland Application Changes

    -   Contributed Software

    -   Installation and Configuration Tools

    -   /etc/rc.d Scripts

    -   Runtime Libraries and API

    -   ABI Compatibility

-   Kernel

    -   Kernel Bug Fixes

    -   Kernel Configuration

-   Devices and Drivers

    -   Device Drivers

    -   Network Drivers

    -   Deprecated Drivers

-   Hardware Support

    -   Hardware Support

    -   Graphics Support

    -   Virtualization Support

    -   ARM Support

-   Storage

    -   General Storage

    -   Networked Storage

    -   ZFS

-   Boot Loader Changes

    -   Boot Loader Changes

-   Networking

    -   General Network

    -   Network Protocols

-   Ports Collection and Package Infrastructure

    -   Packaging Changes

-   Documentation

    -   Documentation Source Changes

-   Release Engineering and Integration

    -   Integration Changes

Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 12.0-RELEASE. It
describes recently added, changed, or deleted features of FreeBSD. It
also provides some notes on upgrading from previous versions of FreeBSD.

The release distribution to which these release notes apply represents
the latest point along the 12-STABLE development branch since 12-STABLE
was created. Information regarding pre-built, binary release
distributions along this branch can be found at
https://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/.

The release distribution to which these release notes apply represents a
point along the 12-STABLE development branch between 11.2-RELEASE and
the future 13.0-RELEASE. Information regarding pre-built, binary release
distributions along this branch can be found at
https://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/.

This distribution of FreeBSD 12.0-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at https://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/ or any of its mirrors.
More information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the Obtaining FreeBSD' appendix to the FreeBSD
Handbook.

All users are encouraged to consult the release errata before installing
FreeBSD. The errata document is updated with "late-breaking" information
discovered late in the release cycle or after the release. Typically, it
contains information on known bugs, security advisories, and corrections
to documentation. An up-to-date copy of the errata for FreeBSD
12.0-RELEASE can be found on the FreeBSD Web site.

This document describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 11.2-RELEASE. In general, changes described here are
unique to the 12-STABLE branch unless specifically marked as MERGED
features.

Typical release note items document recent security advisories issued
after 11.2-RELEASE, new drivers or hardware support, new commands or
options, major bug fixes, or contributed software upgrades. They may
also list changes to major ports/packages or release engineering
practices. Clearly the release notes cannot list every single change
made to FreeBSD between releases; this document focuses primarily on
security advisories, user-visible changes, and major architectural
improvements.

Upgrading from Previous Releases of FreeBSD

[amd64,i386] Binary upgrades between RELEASE versions (and snapshots of
the various security branches) are supported using the freebsd-update(8)
utility. The binary upgrade procedure will update unmodified userland
utilities, as well as unmodified GENERIC kernels distributed as a part
of an official FreeBSD release. The freebsd-update(8) utility requires
that the host being upgraded have Internet connectivity.

Source-based upgrades (those based on recompiling the FreeBSD base
system from source code) from previous versions are supported, according
to the instructions in /usr/src/UPDATING.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Important                         | Upgrading FreeBSD should only be  |
|                                   | attempted after backing up all    |
|                                   | data and configuration files.     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Security and Errata

This section lists the various Security Advisories and Errata Notices
since 11.2-RELEASE.

Security Advisories

+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| Advisory                  | Date               | Topic              |
+===========================+====================+====================+
| No advisories.            |                    |                    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Errata Notices

+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| Errata                    | Date               | Topic              |
+===========================+====================+====================+
| No errata notices.        |                    |                    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Userland

This section covers changes and additions to userland applications,
contributed software, and system utilities.

Userland Configuration Changes

Group permissions on /dev/acpi have been changed to allow users in the
operator GID to invoke acpiconf(8) to suspend the system. [r335864]
(Sponsored by DARPA, AFRL)

The default devfs.rules(5) configuration has been updated to allow
mount_fusefs(8) with jail(8) . [r336565]

The default PAGER now defaults to less(1) for most commands. [r337497]

The newsyslog(8) utility has been updated to reject configuration
entries that specify setuid(2) or executable log files. [r338165]
(Sponsored by Dell EMC Isilon)

The WITH_REPRODUCIBLE_BUILD src.conf(5) knob has been enabled by
default. [r338642] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

LDNS now enables DANE-TA, and GOST has been removed. [r339303]

A new src.conf(5) knob, WITH_RETPOLINE, has been added to enable the
retpoline mitigation for userland builds. [r340773] (Sponsored by The
FreeBSD Foundation)

Userland Application Changes

xlint and the ability to build lint libraries or lint source code has
been removed.

The dtrace(1) utility has been updated to support if and else
statements. [r304200]

The legacy gdb(1) utility included in the base system is now installed
to /usr/libexec for use with crashinfo(8) . The gdbserver and gdbtui
utilities are no longer installed. For interactive debugging, lldb(1) or
a modern version of gdb(1) from devel/gdb should be used. A new
src.conf(5) knob, WITHOUT_GDB_LIBEXEC has been added to disable building
gdb(1) . The gdb(1) utility is still installed in /usr/bin on sparc64.
[r317416]

The setfacl(1) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -R, used
to operate recursively on directories. [r332396] (Sponsored by The
FreeBSD Foundation)

The cat(1) utility has been updated to print output aligned the same
regardless of if invoked with -ne or -be. [r323865]

The default bootstrap linker has been changed to ld_lld(1) for amd64.
[r334391] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The dhclient(8) utility has been updated to add a configuration knob to
allow superseding the interface-mtu option provided by an
incorrectly-configured DHCP server. [r334443]

The asf(8) utility has been removed, as kgdb(1) now handles kernel
module state internally. [r335222] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The sha224(1) utility has been added. [r336126]

The geli(8) utility has been updated to provide support for initializing
multiple providers at once when they use the same passphrase and/or key.
[r336659]

The default bootstrap linker has been changed to ld_lld(1) for i386.
[r336901] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The default bootstrap linker has been changed to ld_lld(1) for armv7.
[r337057] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The dd(1) utility has been updated to add the status=progress option,
which prints the status of its operation on a single line once per
second, similar to GNU dd(1) . [r337505]

The date(1) utility has been updated to include a new flag, -I, which
prints its output in ISO 8601 formatting. [r337332]

The bectl(8) utility has been added, providing an administrative
interface for managing ZFS boot environments, similar to sysutils/beadm.
[r337663]

The ls(1) utility has been updated to include a new --color=when flag,
where when can be one of always, auto (default), or never. [r337956]

The bhyve(8) utility has been updated to add a new subcommand to the -l
and -s flags, help, which when used, prints a list of supported LPC and
PCI devices, respectively. [r338210] (Sponsored by iXsystems)

The tftp(1) utility has been updated to change the default transfer mode
from ASCII to binary. [r338258]

The last(1) utility has been updated to include libxo(3) support.
[r338352]

The lastlogin(8) utility has been updated to include libxo(3) support.
[r338353]

The chown(8) utility has been updated to prevent overflow of UID or GID
arguments where the argument exceeded UID_MAX or GID_MAX, respectively.
[r338950] (Sponsored by Dell EMC Isilon)

The ctm(1) and related utilities have been marked as deprecated for
removal in FreeBSD 13.0. [r340444]

Contributed Software

The ELF Tool Chain has been updated to version r3614. [r333063]
(Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The zstd(1) utility has been updated to version 1.3.4. [r331602]
(Sponsored by Dell EMC Isilon)

The vt(4) Terminus BSD Console font has been updated to version 4.46.
[r332452] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The xz(1) utility has been updated to version 5.2.4. [r333783]

The clang, llvm, lld, lldb, compiler-rt utilities and libc++ have been
updated to version 6.0.1. [r335799]

The bsnmp utility has been updated to version 1.13. [r335885]

The WPA utilities have been updated to version 2.6. [r336203]

The ntpd(8) utility has been updated to allow being run as a non-root
user. [r336525]

Note:
Source-based upgrades from FreeBSD 11.x and earlier require the ntpd UID
(123) and GID (123) to exist before the installworld target is run. See
the "rebuild everything and install" section of UPDATING for the
documented procedure for source-based upgrades for more details.

Support for UDP-lite has been added to dtrace_udplite(4) . [r337018]

The file(1) utility has been updated to version 5.34. [r337442]

The lua utility has been updated to version 5.3.5. [r337810]

Support for send, receive, and state-change providers have been added to
dtrace_sctp(4) . [r338213]

The ntpd(8) utility has been updated to version 4.2.8p12. [r338126]

OpenSSH has been updated to version 7.8p1. [r338561]

The mandoc(1) utility has been updated to version 1.14.4. [r338826]

Additional capsicum(4) support has been added to sshd(8) . [r339216]

Serf has been updated to version 1.3.9. [r339256]

ACPICA has been updated to version 20181003. [r339262]

Unbound has been updated to version 1.8.1. [r339278]

The timezone database files have been updated to version 2018g.
[r339937]

OpenSSL has been updated to version 1.1.1a. [r340711]

Installation and Configuration Tools

The bsdinstall(8) installer and zfsboot(8) boot code have been updated
to allow an UEFI+GELI installation option. [r338282] (Sponsored by Klara
Systems)

/etc/rc.d Scripts

A new rc(8) has been added to create cfumass(4) LUNs. [r332857]
(Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The geli(8) rc(8) script has been updated to include support for a new
variable, geli_groups, which provides support to attach multiple
providers when set in rc.conf(5) . [r335673]

The rc(8) subsystem has been updated to support new keywords in
rc.conf(5) , enable, disable, and delete with rc.d(8) scripts and the
service(8) utility. See rc.conf(5) for usage information. [r340348]
(Sponsored by Smule, Inc.)

Runtime Libraries and API

The getrandom(2) system call and getentropy(3) library have been added,
compatible with LinuxÂ® and OpenBSD implementations. [r331279]

The arc4random(3) library has been updated to match the OpenBSD version
1.35. [r338059]

The libarchive(3) library has been updated to version 3.3.3. [r338600]

ABI Compatibility

get_s(3) has been added. [r331936]

The pthread(3) library has been updated to incorporate POSIX/SUSv4-2018
compliance improvements. [r337992]

The arc4random(3) library has been updated to remove arc4random_stir()
and arc4random_addrandom(). [r338331]

Kernel

This section covers changes to kernel configurations, system tuning, and
system control parameters that are not otherwise categorized.

Kernel Bug Fixes

The ACPI subsystem has been updated to implement Device object types for
ACPI 6.0 support, required for some Dell, Inc. Poweredgeâ¢ AMDÂ® Epycâ¢
systems. [r326956] (Sponsored by Dell EMC Isilon)

An issue with IPv6-AH IPSEC padding has been fixed to match RFC4302.
[r334625] (Sponsored by Dell EMC Isilon)

The amdsmn(4) and amdtemp(4) drivers have been updated to attach to AMDÂ®
Ryzen 2â¢ host bridges. [r340446]

The amdtemp(4) driver has been updated to fix temperature reporting for
AMDÂ® 2990WX CPUs. [r340447]

Kernel Configuration

The VIMAGE kernel configuration option has been enabled by default.
[r324810]

The dumpon(8) utility has been updated to add support for compressed
kernel crash dumps when the kernel configuration file includes the GZIO
option. See rc.conf(5) and dumpon(8) for additional information.
[r324965] (Sponsored by Dell EMC Isilon)

The ext2fs(5) filesystem has been updated to support full read/write
support for ext4. [r327584]

The pmtimer device has been removed from the i386 GENERIC kernel
configuration. Its functionality is now part of apm(4) . [r327774]

The dumpon(8) utility has been updated to add support for zstd(1)
-compressed kernel crash dumps when the kernel configuration file
includes the ZSTDIO option. See rc.conf(5) and dumpon(8) for additional
information. [r329240] (Sponsored by Dell EMC Isilon)

A new src.conf(5) knob, WITH_KERNEL_RETPOLINE, has been added to enable
the retpoline mitigation for kernel builds. [r330110] (Sponsored by The
FreeBSD Foundation)

The EKCD, GZIO, ZSTDIO, and NETDUMP kernel configuration options have
been enabled by default for amd64, i386, aarch64, powerpc, powerpc64,
and sparc64 architectures. [r333890]

A new kernel configuration option, KASSERT_PANIC_OPTIONAL, has been
added that allows runtime KASSERT(9) behavior changes without
necessarily invoking panic(9) . The option is disabled by default.
[r338214] (Sponsored by Dell EMC Isilon)

The NUMA option has been enabled by default in the amd64 GENERIC and
MINIMAL kernel configurations. [r338602] (Sponsored by Dell EMC Isilon,
Netflix)

Devices and Drivers

This section covers changes and additions to devices and device drivers
since 11.2-RELEASE.

Device Drivers

The random(4) device has been updated to allow terminating large reads
with ^C. [r331070] (Sponsored by Dell EMC Isilon)

Support for the MicrochipÂ® LAN78xxâ¢ USB3-GigE controller has been added.
[r333713] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

A new multifunction device has been added to usb_template(4) , providing
mass storage, CDC ACM (serial), and CDC ECM (ethernet) simultaneously.
[r333760] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The random(4) driver has been updated to remove the Yarrow algorithm.
The Fortuna algorithm remains the default, and now only, available
algorithm. [r338324]

The netdump(4) driver has been added, providing a facility through which
kernel crash dumps can be transmitted to a remote host after a system
panic. See netdump(4) and dumpon(8) for more information and
configuration details. [r333283] (Sponsored by Dell EMC Isilon)

The random(4) driver has been updated to fix excessive activity during
pseudo-random number generation. [r338292]

The vt(4) driver has been updated with performance improvements, drawing
text at rates ranging from 2- to 6-times faster. [r338316]

The ichwd(4) driver has been updated to add TCO watchdog timer support
for IntelÂ® Lewisburg PCH (C620) chipsets. [r340190] (Sponsored by
Panzura)

Network Drivers

The ixl(4) driver has been updated to version 1.9.9-k. [r333149]
(Sponsored by Intel Corporation)

The cxgbe(4) driver has been updated to provide hardware support for the
SO_MAX_PACING_RATE setsockopt(2) option when the kernel configuration
contains the RATELIMIT option. [r334143] (Sponsored by Chelsio
Communications)

The ixlv(4) driver has been renamed to iavf(4) and updated to use
iflib(9) . The ixlv(4) kernel module is now a hard link to iavf(4) for
backwards compatibility for upgrading from earlier FreeBSD releases.
[r339338] (Sponsored by Panzura)

Deprecated Drivers

The lmc(4) driver has been removed. [r333144] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD
Foundation)

The ixgb(4) driver has been removed. [r333173] (Sponsored by Limelight
Networks)

The nxge(4) driver has been removed. [r333322] (Sponsored by Limelight
Networks)

The vxge(4) driver has been removed. [r333717] (Sponsored by Limelight
Networks)

The jedec_ts(4) driver has been removed in 12.0-RELEASE, and its
functionality replaced by jedec_dimm(4) . [r337033]

The DRM driver for modern graphics chipsets has been marked deprecated
and marked for removal in FreeBSD 13. The DRM kernel modules are
available from graphics/drm-stable-kmod or graphics/drm-legacy-kmod in
the Ports Collection as well as via pkg(8) . Additionally, the kernel
modules have been added to the lua loader.conf(5) module_blacklist, as
installation from the Ports Collection or pkg(8) is strongly
recommended. [r339218]

The following drivers have been deprecated in FreeBSD 12.0, and not
present in FreeBSD 13.0: ae(4) , de(4) , ed(4) , ep(4) , ex(4) , fe(4) ,
pcn(4) , sf(4) , sn(4) , tl(4) , tx(4) , txp(4) , vx(4) , wb(4) , xe(4)
[r339735]

Hardware Support

This section covers general hardware support for physical machines,
hypervisors, and virtualization environments, as well as hardware
changes and updates that do not otherwise fit in other sections of this
document.

Hardware Support

Support for powernv POWER9 MMU initialization has been added. [r333273]

Graphics Support

FreeBSD has changed the way graphics drivers are handled on amd64 and
i386. Graphics drivers for modern ATI/AMDÂ® and IntelÂ® graphics cards are
now available in the Ports Collection. The base drivers are still
available and will be installed by default, but they lack support for
current generation laptop and desktop systems.

In most cases it is enough to install graphics/drm-kmod from ports or
packages to install a driver appropriate for the system, then adding the
appropriate driver to kld_list in rc.conf(5) .

For IntelÂ® (i915) systems after Broadwellâ¢, the rc.conf(5) entry is:

    kld_list="/boot/modules/i915kms.ko"

Systems with ATI/AMDÂ® graphics cards have two options. Modern systems
starting with the HD7000 series GPU should use:

    kld_list="/boot/modules/amdgpu.ko"

Systems with cards released before the HD7000 GPU use:

    kld_list="/boot/modules/radeonkms.ko"

Note:
Users must be added to the video GID after installing graphics/drm-kmod
in order for X to start properly.

Note:
There are known issues with the xserver driver provided by
x11-drivers/xf86-video-ati when using graphics drivers from the base
system; x11-drivers/xf86-video-ati-legacy should be used instead.

Note:
There is a known issue where booting with UEFI and using the ATI/AMDÂ®
graphics driver may cause the screen to be garbled before the
appropriate driver is loaded. For additional information regarding
graphics support on FreeBSD, please see the Graphics Wiki Page.

Virtualization Support

AmazonÂ® EC2â¢ AMI instances now have sysutils/amazon-ssm-agent installed
by default, though the service is not enabled by default in rc.conf(5) .
To enable the service, add: [r325254]

      >>/etc/rc.conf
        amazon_ssm_agent_enable="YES"

to the EC2â¢ user-data.

AmazonÂ® EC2â¢ AMI instances now disable ChallengeResponseAuthentication
in sshd_config(5) by default. [r326564]

AmazonÂ® EC2â¢ AMI instances now use the AmazonÂ® internal NTP service by
default. [r326565]

The bhyve(8) utility has been updated to allow controlling CPU topology
from userland. [r332298]

The bhyve(8) utility has been updated to add virtio_scsi(4) storage
support. [r334940] (Sponsored by iXsystems)

The bhyve(8) utility has been updated to add NVMe device emulation.
[r335974] (Sponsored by iXsystems)

A new sysctl(8) , security.jail.vmm_allowed, has been added, which when
set to 1 allows bhyve(8) use within a jail(8) . [r337023] (Sponsored by
HardenedBSD, G2, Inc.)

AmazonÂ® EC2â¢ AMI instances now disable the PS/2 keyboard and mouse
devices by default, reducing overall boot time by 2.5 seconds. [r338321]

ARM Support

Support for the USB OTG serial terminal has been enabled on arm systems
by default. [r335004] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The armv6 and armv7 images now default to boot with EFI. [r336998]

Support has been added for building aarch64 images for the PINE64-LTS
system. [r337000]

Support for capsicum(4) has been enabled on armv6 and armv7 by default.
[r338666] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

Storage

This section covers changes and additions to file systems and other
storage subsystems, both local and networked.

General Storage

The UFS/FFS filesystem has been updated to support check hashes to
cylinder-group maps. Support for check hashes is available only for
UFS2. [r323923]

The CAM Target Layer (CTL) frontend and backend options have been
overhauled to use nv(3) allowing creating multiple ioctl(2) frontend
ports. [r333446] (Sponsored by iXsystems)

The default auto_master(5) configuration has been updated to add the
noautoro automont(8) flag to the /media mount point (commented by
default). [r337749] (Sponsored by DARPA, AFRL)

The UFS/FFS filesystem has been updated to consolidate TRIM/BIO_DELETE
commands, reducing read/write requests due to fewer TRIM messages being
sent simultaneously. [r338056] (Sponsored by Netflix)

TRIM consolidation support has been enabled by default in the UFS/FFS
filesystem. TRIM consolidation can be disabled by setting the
vfs.ffs.dotrimcons sysctl(8) to 0, or adding vfs.ffs.dotrimcons=0 to
sysctl.conf(5) . [r338517] (Sponsored by Netflix)

The geom(8) utility has been updated to add a new flag, -p, which prints
the GEOM class of the specified provider. [r338640] (Sponsored by DARPA,
AFRL)

The geom(8) utility has been updated to add a new flag, -t, which prints
the GEOM hierarchy. [r338684] (Sponsored by DARPA, AFRL)

Networked Storage

The NFS version 4.1 server has been updated to include pNFS server
support. [r335012]

ZFS

ZFS has been updated to include new sysctl(8) s,
vfs.zfs.arc_min_prefetch_ms and vfs.zfs.arc_min_prescient_prefetch_ms,
which improve performance of the zpool(8) scrub subcommand. [r334844]

Boot Loader Changes

This section covers the boot loader, boot menu, and other boot-related
changes.

Boot Loader Changes

The lua loader(8) has been updated to detect a list of installed kernels
to boot. [r329501] (Sponsored by Dell EMC Isilon)

The loader(8) has been updated to support geli(8) for all architectures
and all disk-like devices. [r336252] (Sponsored by Microchip Technology,
Inc.)

The init(8) utility has been updated to be able to run an executable
written in languages other than sh(1) , such as Python, for example.
[r337321] (Sponsored by DARPA, AFRL)

The loader(8) has been updated to add support for loading IntelÂ®
microcode updates early during the boot process. [r337715] (Sponsored by
The FreeBSD Foundation)

A new kenv(1) variable, init_exec, has been added to loader(8) which
allows init(8) to execute a file after opening the console, replacing
init(8) as PID 1. [r337740] (Sponsored by DARPA, AFRL)

The default libstand(3) interpreter has been changed to Lua. [r338050]

The lua loader(8) has been updated to support module blacklists.
[r339218]

The default lua loader.conf(5) has been updated to include the
kernels_autodetect option, which defaults to YES, supplementing the
loader(8) support to list available kernels to boot introduced in
revision 329501. [r339308]

Networking

This section describes changes that affect networking in FreeBSD.

General Network

The carp(4) interface has been updated to keep the state as INIT instead
of MASTER when the net.inet.carp.allow sysctl(8) is set to 0. [r333322]
(Sponsored by iXsystems)

The pf(4) packet filter is now usable within a jail(8) using vnet(9) .

The pf(4) packet filter has been updated to use rmlock(9) instead of
rwlock(9) , resulting in significant performance improvements. [r334375]

The SO_REUSEPORT_LB option has been added to the network stack, allowing
multiple programs or threads to bind to the same port, and incoming
connections load balanced using a hash function. [r334719] (Sponsored by
Limelight Networks)

The pf(4) ioctl interface and pfctl(8) now support altq(4) bandwidth
parameters of 2^32 bps or greater. The HFSC discipline has been upgraded
to operate correctly with bandwidth parameters up to 100 Gbps, and
bandwidth parameters supplied to the non-upgraded disciplines will now
be saturated at the prior 32-bit limit. [r338253]

Network Protocols

Support for token-ring networks has been removed. [r331714] (Sponsored
by DARPA, AFRL)

Support for the Arcnet protocol has been removed. [r332490] (Sponsored
by DARPA, AFRL)

Ports Collection and Package Infrastructure

This section covers changes to the FreeBSD Ports Collection, package
infrastructure, and package maintenance and installation tools.

Packaging Changes

The pkg(8) utility has been updated to verson 1.10.5_5.

KDE has been updated to version 5.12.5.

Perl has been updated to version 5.26.2.

Python has been updated to version 2.7.

Documentation

This section covers changes to the FreeBSD Documentation Project sources
and toolchain.

Documentation Source Changes

The arch(7) manual page has been added, containing details specific to
certain architectures. [r303033] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

Release Engineering and Integration

This section convers changes that are specific to the FreeBSD Release
Engineering processes.

Integration Changes

The FreeBSD/i386 memory stick installation images have been changed to
use the MBR partitioning scheme instead of GPT to address boot issues
with some BIOSes. [r332446] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The FreeBSD/amd64 memory stick installation images have been changed to
use the MBR partitioning scheme instead of GPT to address boot issues
with some BIOSes. [r334337] (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: June 19, 2021 by Danilo G. Baio

Legal Notices | Â© 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
