[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/amd64 6.0-RELEASE Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005 The FreeBSD Documentation
Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/common/new.sgml,v
1.883.2.7.2.1 2005/10/21 16:01:46 yar Exp $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

IBM, AIX, EtherJet, Netfinity, OS/2, PowerPC, PS/2, S/390, and ThinkPad
are trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in the
United States, other countries, or both.

IEEE, POSIX, and 802 are registered trademarks of Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. in the United States.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “®” symbol.

The release notes for FreeBSD 6.0-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system on the 6-STABLE development
line. This document lists applicable security advisories that were
issued since the last release, as well as significant changes to the
FreeBSD kernel and userland. Some brief remarks on upgrading are also
presented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 What's New

2.1 Security Advisories

2.2 Kernel Changes

2.2.1 Boot Loader Changes

2.2.2 Hardware Support

2.2.3 Network Protocols

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

2.2.5 File Systems

2.2.6 Contributed Software

2.3 Userland Changes

2.3.1 /etc/rc.d Scripts

2.4 Contributed Software

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

2.7 Documentation

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 6.0-RELEASE on the
AMD64 hardware platform. It describes recently added, changed, or
deleted features of FreeBSD. It also provides some notes on upgrading
from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 6.0-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/ or any of its mirrors. More
information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the “Obtaining FreeBSD” appendix to the FreeBSD
Handbook.

All users are encouraged to consult the release errata before installing
FreeBSD. The errata document is updated with “late-breaking” information
discovered late in the release cycle or after the release. Typically, it
contains information on known bugs, security advisories, and corrections
to documentation. An up-to-date copy of the errata for FreeBSD
6.0-RELEASE can be found on the FreeBSD Web site.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 What's New

This section describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 5.4-RELEASE. In general, changes described here are unique
to the 6-STABLE branch unless specifically marked as [MERGED] features.

Typical release note items document recent security advisories issued
after 5.4-RELEASE, new drivers or hardware support, new commands or
options, major bug fixes, or contributed software upgrades. They may
also list changes to major ports/packages or release engineering
practices. Clearly the release notes cannot list every single change
made to FreeBSD between releases; this document focuses primarily on
security advisories, user-visible changes, and major architectural
improvements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Security Advisories

A bug in the fetch(1) utility, which allows a malicious HTTP server to
cause arbitrary portions of the client's memory to be overwritten, has
been fixed. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-04:16.fetch. [MERGED]

A bug in procfs(5) and linprocfs(5) which could allow a malicious local
user to read parts of kernel memory or perform a local denial of service
attack by causing a system panic, has been fixed. For more information,
see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:17.procfs. [MERGED]

Two buffer overflows in the TELNET client program have been corrected.
They could have allowed a malicious TELNET server or an active network
attacker to cause telnet(1) to execute arbitrary code with the
privileges of the user running it. More information can be found in
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:01.telnet. [MERGED]

An information disclosure vulnerability in the sendfile(2) system call,
which could permit it to transmit random parts of kernel memory, has
been fixed. More details are in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-05:02.sendfile. [MERGED]

A possible privilege escalation vulnerability on FreeBSD/amd64 has been
fixed. This allows unprivileged users to gain direct access to some
hardware which cannot be accessed without the elevated privilege level.
More details are in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:03.amd64. [MERGED]

An information leak vulnerability in the SIOCGIFCONF ioctl(2), which
leaked 12 bytes of kernel memory, has been fixed. More details are in
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:04.ifconf. [MERGED]

Several programming errors in cvs(1), which could potentially cause
arbitrary code to be executed on CVS servers, have been corrected.
Further information can be found in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-05:05.cvs. [MERGED]

An error in the default permissions on the /dev/iir device node, which
allowed unprivileged local users can send commands to the hardware
supported by the iir(4) driver, has been fixed. For more information,
see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:06.iir. [MERGED]

A bug in the validation of i386_get_ldt(2) system call input arguments,
which may allow kernel memory to be disclosed to a user process, has
been fixed. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-05:07.ldt. [MERGED]

Several information disclosure vulnerabilities in various parts of the
kernel have been fixed. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-05:08.kmem. [MERGED]

Because of an information disclosure vulnerability on processors using
Hyper-Threading Technology (HTT), the machdep.hyperthreading_allowed
sysctl variable has been added. It defaults to 1 (HTT enabled) on
FreeBSD CURRENT, and 0 (HTT disabled) on the 4-STABLE and 5-STABLE
development branches and supported security fix branches. More
information can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:09.htt.
[MERGED]

A bug in the tcpdump(1) utility which allows a malicious remote user to
cause a denial-of-service by using specially crafted packets, has been
fixed. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-05:10.tcpdump. [MERGED]

Two problems in the gzip(1) utility have been fixed. These may allow a
local user to modify permissions of arbitrary files and overwrite
arbitrary local files when uncompressing a file. For more information,
see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:11.gzip. [MERGED]

A bug in BIND 9 DNSSEC has been fixed. When DNSSEC is enabled, this bug
may allow a remote attacker to inject a specially crafted packet which
will cause named(8) to terminate. For more information, see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:12.bind9. [MERGED]

A bug has been fixed in ipfw(4) that could cause packets to be matched
incorrectly against a lookup table. This bug only affects SMP machines
or UP machines that have the PREEMPTION kernel option enabled. More
information is contained in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:13.ipfw.
[MERGED]

Two security-related problems have been fixed in bzip2(1). These include
a potential denial of service and unauthorized manipulation of file
permissions. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-05:14.bzip2. [MERGED]

Two problems in FreeBSD's TCP stack have been fixed. They could allow
attackers to stall existing TCP connections, creating a
denial-of-service situation. More information is contained in security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-05:15.tcp. [MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Kernel Changes

The kernel debugger ddb(4) now supports a show alllocks command, which
dumps a list of processes and threads currently holding sleep mutexes
(and spin mutexes for the current thread). [MERGED]

The kernel crash dump format has been changed to ELF to support large
memory (more than 4GB) environments.

The ichsmb(4) driver is now available as a loadable kernel module.

The jail(8) feature now supports a new sysctl
security.jail.chflags_allowed, which controls the behavior of chflags(1)
within a jail. If set to 0 (the default), then a jailed root user is
treated as an unprivileged user; if set to 1, then a jailed root user is
treated the same as an unjailed root user. [MERGED]

A sysctl security.jail.getfsstatroot_only has been renamed to
security.jail.enforce_statfs and now supports the following policies:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Value             Policy
  ----------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  0                 Show all mount-points without any restrictions.

  1                 Show only mount-points below jail's chroot and show
                    only part of the mount-point's path (for example, if
                    the jail's chroot directory is /jails/foo and
                    mount-point is /jails/foo/usr/home, only /usr/home
                    will be shown).

  2                 Show only mount-point where jail's chroot directory
                    is placed.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The loader tunable debug.mpsafevm has been enabled by default. [MERGED]

memguard(9), a kernel memory allocator designed to help detect
“tamper-after-free” scenarios, has been added. This must be explicitly
enabled via options DEBUG_MEMGUARD, plus small kernel modifications. It
is generally intended for use by kernel developers.

struct ifnet and the network interface API have been changed. Due to ABI
incompatibility, all drivers not in the FreeBSD base system need to be
updated to use the new API and recompiled.

A number of bugs have been fixed in the ULE scheduler. [MERGED]

Fine-grained locking to allow much of the VFS stack to run without the
Giant lock has been added. This is enabled by default on the alpha,
amd64, and i386 architectures, and can be disabled by setting the loader
tunable (and sysctl variable) debug.mpsafevfs to 0.

System V IPC objects (message queues, semaphores, and shared memory) now
have support for Mandatory Access Control policies, notably mac_biba(4),
mac_mls(4), mac_stub(4), and mac_test(4).

The sysctl(3) MIBs beginning with “debug” now require the kernel option
options SYSCTL_DEBUG. This option is disabled by default.

The generic tty(4) driver interface has been added and many device
drivers including cx(4) ({tty,cua}x), cy(4) ({tty,cua}c), digi(4)
({tty,cua}D), rc(4) ({tty,cua}m), rp(4) ({tty,cua}R), sab(4)
({tty,cua}z), si(4) ({tty,cua}A), sio(4) ({tty,cua}d), sx ({tty,cua}G),
uart(4) ({tty,cua}u), ubser(4) ({tty,cua}y), ucom(4) ({tty,cua}U), and
ucycom(4) ({tty,cua}y) have been rewritten to use it. Note that
/etc/remote and /etc/ttys have been updated as well.

The vkbd(4) driver has been added. This driver provides a software
loopback mechanism that can implement a virtual AT keyboard similar to
what the pty(4) driver does for terminals.

FreeBSD always uses the local APIC timer even on uni-processor systems
now.

The default HZ parameter (which controls various kernel timers) has been
increased from 100 to 1000 on the i386 and ia64. It has been reduced
from 1024 to 1000 on the amd64 to reduce synchronization effects with
other system clocks.

The maximum length of shell commands has changed from 128 bytes to
PAGE_SIZE. By default, this value is either 4KB (i386, pc98, amd64, and
powerpc) or 8KB (sparc64 and ia64). As a result, compatibility modules
need to be rebuilt to stay synchronized with data structure changes in
the kernel.

A new tunable vm.blacklist has been added. This can hold a space or
comma separated list of physical addresses. The pages containing these
physical addresses will not be added to the free list and thus will
effectively be ignored by the FreeBSD VM system. The physical addresses
of any ignored pages are listed in the message buffer as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1 Boot Loader Changes

The autoboot loader command now supports the prompt parameter.

The autoboot loader command will now prevent the user from interrupting
the boot process at all if the autoboot_delay variable is set to -1.
[MERGED]

A loader menu option to set hint.atkbd.0.flags=0x1 has been added. This
setting allows USB keyboards to work if no PS/2 keyboard is attached.

The beastie boot menu has been disabled by default.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2 Hardware Support

The acpi(4) driver now turns the ACPI and PCI devices off or to a lower
power state when suspending, and back on again when resuming. This
behavior can be disabled by setting the debug.acpi.do_powerstate and
hw.pci.do_powerstate sysctls to 0.

The acpi_ibm(4) driver for IBM laptops has been added. It provides
support for the various hotkeys and reading fan status and thermal
sensors.

The acpi_fujitsu(4) driver for handling acpi(4)-controlled buttons on
Fujitsu laptops has been added.

The acpi_sony driver, which supports the Sony Notebook Controller on
various Sony laptops has been added.

The atkbdc(4), atkbd(4), and psm(4) drivers have been rewritten in more
bus-independent way, and now support the EBus found on the sparc64
platform.

A framework for flexible processor speed control has been added. It
provides methods for various drivers to control CPU power utilization by
adjusting the processor speed. More details can be found in the
cpufreq(4) manual page. [MERGED] Currently supported drivers include
ichss (Intel SpeedStep for ICH), acpi_perf (ACPI CPU performance
states), and acpi_throttle (ACPI CPU throttling). The latter two drivers
are contained in the acpi(4) driver. These can individually be disabled
by setting device hints such as hint.ichss.0.disabled="1".

Support for the PadLock Security Co-processor in VIA C3 processors has
been added to the crypto(9) subsystem.

The hwpmc(4) hardware performance monitoring counter driver has been
added. This driver virtualizes the hardware performance monitoring
facilities in modern CPUs and provides support for using these
facilities from user level processes. For more details, see manual pages
of hwpmc(4), associated libraries, and associated userland utilities.

The pcii driver has been added to support GPIB-PCIIA IEEE-488 cards.
[MERGED]

The atkbd(4) driver now supports a 0x8 (bit 3) flag to disable testing
the keyboard port during the device probe as this can cause hangs on
some machines, specifically Compaq R3000Z series amd64 laptops.

The psm(4) driver now has improved support for Synaptics Touchpad users.
It now has better tracking of slow-speed movement and support for
various extra buttons and dials. These features can be tuned with the
hw.psm.synaptics.* hierarchy of sysctl variables.

The uftdi(4) driver now supports the FTDI FT2232C chip.

The uplcom(4) driver now supports handling of the CTS signal.

The ehci(4) driver has been improved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.1 Multimedia Support

The snd_csa(4) driver now supports suspend and resume operation.

The uaudio(4) driver now has some added functionality, including volume
control on more inputs and recording capability on some devices.
[MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.2 Network Interface Support

The ath(4) driver has been updated to split the transmit rate control
algorithm into a separate module. One of device ath_rate_onoe,
device ath_rate_amrr, or device ath_rate_sample must be included in the
kernel configuration when using the ath(4) driver.

The bge(4) driver now supports the altq(4) framework, as well as the
BCM5714, 5721, 5750, 5751, 5751M and 5789 chips. [MERGED]

The cdce(4) USB Communication Device Class Ethernet driver has been
added. [MERGED]

The cp(4) driver is now MPSAFE. [MERGED]

The ctau(4) driver is now MPSAFE. [MERGED]

The cx(4) driver is now MPSAFE. [MERGED]

The dc(4) driver now supports the altq(4) framework and is MPSAFE.
[MERGED]

The de(4) driver is now MPSAFE.

The ed(4) driver now supports the altq(4) framework. [MERGED]

The ed(4) driver is now MPSAFE.

In the em(4) driver, hardware support for VLAN tagging is now disabled
by default due to some interactions between this feature and promiscuous
mode. [MERGED]

Ethernet flow control is now disabled by default in the fxp(4) driver,
to prevent problems on a subnet when a system panics or is left in the
kernel debugger. [MERGED]

The gx(4) driver has been removed because it is no longer maintained
actively and the em(4) driver supports all of the supported hardware.

The hme(4) driver is now MPSAFE. [MERGED]

The ipw(4) (for Intel PRO/Wireless 2100), iwi(4) (for Intel PRO/Wireless
2200BG/2225BG/2915ABG), ral(4) (for Ralink Technology RT2500), and
ural(4) (for Ralink Technology RT2500USB) drivers have been added.

The ixgb(4) driver is now MPSAFE. [MERGED]

The musycc driver, for the LanMedia LMC1504 T1/E1 network interface
card, has been removed due to disuse.

The my(4) driver is now MPSAFE.

Drivers using the ndis(4) device driver wrapper mechanism are now built
and loaded differently. The ndis(4) driver can now be pre-built as a
module or statically compiled into a kernel. Individual drivers can now
be built with the ndisgen(8) utility; the result is a kernel module that
can be loaded into a running kernel using kldload(8). [MERGED]

The ndis(4) device driver wrapper now supports Windows®/x86-64 binaries
on amd64 systems. [MERGED]

The nve(4) driver, which supports the nVidia nForce MCP Networking
Adapter, has been added.

The pcn(4) driver is now MPSAFE.

The re(4) driver now supports the altq(4) framework. [MERGED]

The sf(4) driver now has support for device polling and altq(4) and is
MPSAFE. [MERGED]

Several programming errors in the sk(4) driver have been corrected.
These bugs were particular to SMP systems, and could cause panics, page
faults, aborted SSH connections, or corrupted file transfers. More
details can be found in errata note FreeBSD-EN-05:02.sk. [MERGED]

The sk(4) driver now has support for altq(4). This driver also now
supports jumbo frames on Yukon-based interfaces. [MERGED]

The ste(4) driver now has support for altq(4).

The vge(4) driver now has support for device polling ( polling(4)).

Support for 802.11 devices in the wlan(4) framework has been greatly
overhauled. In addition to architectural changes, it includes completed
802.11g, WPA, 802.11i, 802.1x, WME/WMM, AP-side power-saving, and plugin
frameworks for cryptography modules, authenticators, and access control.
Note in particular that WEP now requires the wlan_wep module to be
loaded (or compiled) into the kernel.

The xl(4) driver now supports polling(4). [MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.3 Network Protocols

The MTU feedback in IPv6 has been disabled when the sender writes data
that must be fragmented. [MERGED]

The Common Address Redundancy Protocol (CARP) has been implemented. CARP
comes from OpenBSD and allows multiple hosts to share an IP address,
providing high availability and load balancing. For more information,
see the carp(4) manual page. [MERGED]

The if_bridge(4) network bridging implementation, originally from
NetBSD, has been added. It supports the IEEE 802.1D Spanning Tree
Protocol, individual interface devices for each bridge, and filtering of
bridged packets. The ifconfig(8) utility now supports configuration of
if_bridge(4).

The ipfw(4) IPDIVERT option is now available as a kernel loadable
module. If this module is not loaded, ipfw(4) will refuse to install
divert rules and natd(8) will return the error message “protocol not
supported”.

The ipfw(4) system can work with debug.mpsafenet=1 (this tunable is 1 by
default) when the gid, jail, and/or uid rule options are used. [MERGED]

The ipfw(4) and dummynet(4) systems now support IPv6.

ipfw(8) now supports classification and tagging of altq(4) packets via a
divert socket. It is also possible to specify rules that match TCP
packets with specific payload sizes.

The ipfw(8) ipfw fwd rule now supports the full packet destination
manipulation when the kernel option options IPFIREWALL_FORWARD_EXTENDED
is specified in addition to options IPFIRWALL_FORWARD. This kernel
option disables all restrictions to ensure proper behavior for locally
generated packets and allows redirection of packets destined to locally
configured IP addresses. Note that ipfw(8) rules have to be carefully
crafted to make sure that things like PMTU discovery do not break.
[MERGED]

The ipfw(8) system now supports IPv4 only rules.

ipnat(8) now allows redirect rules to work for non-TCP/UDP packets.
[MERGED]

Ongoing work is reducing the use of the Giant lock by the network
protocol stack and improving the locking strategies.

The libalias library can now be built as a kernel module.

The link state change notifications of network interfaces are sent to
/dev/devctl now.

A new ng_ipfw(4) NetGraph node provides a simple interface between the
ipfw(4) and netgraph(4) facilities.

A new ng_nat(4) NetGraph node has been added to perform NAT functions.

A new ng_netflow(4) NetGraph node allows a router running FreeBSD to do
NetFlow version 5 exports. [MERGED]

A new ng_tcpmss(4) NetGraph node has been added. This supports altering
MSS options of TCP packets.

The sppp(4) driver now includes Frame Relay support. [MERGED]

The sppp(4) driver is now MPSAFE.

The FreeBSD routing table now requires gateways for routes to be of the
same address family as the route itself. The route(8) utility now
rejects a combination of different address families. For example:

    # route add 10.1.1.1 -inet6 fe80::1%fxp0

The new sysctl net.link.tap.user_open has been implemented. This allows
unprivileged access to tap(4) device nodes based on file system
permissions.

A bug in TCP that sometimes caused RST packets to be ignored if the
receive window was zero bytes has been fixed. [MERGED]

The RST handling of the FreeBSD TCP stack has been improved to make
reset attacks as difficult as possible while maintaining compatibility
with the widest range of TCP stacks. The algorithm is as follows: For
connections in the ESTABLISHED state, only resets with sequence numbers
exactly matching last_ack_sent will cause a reset; all other segments
will be silently dropped. For connections in all other states, a reset
anywhere in the window will cause the connection to be reset. All other
segments will be silently dropped. Note that this behavior technically
violates the RFC 793 specification; the conventional (but less secure)
behavior can be restored by setting a new sysctl
net.inet.tcp.insecure_rst to 1. [MERGED]

Several bugs in the TCP SACK implementation have been fixed. [MERGED]

RFC 1644 T/TCP support has been removed. This is because the design is
based on a weak security model that can easily permit denial-of-service
attacks. This TCP extension has been considered a defective one in a
recent Internet Draft.

The KAME IPv4 IPsec implementation integrated in FreeBSD now supports
TCP-MD5. [MERGED]

Random ephemeral port number allocation has led to some problems with
port reuse at high connection rates. This feature is now disabled during
periods of high connection rates; whenever new connections are created
faster than net.inet.ip.portrange.randomcps per second, port number
randomization is disabled for the next net.inet.ip.portrange.randomtime
seconds. The default values for these two sysctl variables are 10 and
45, respectively. [MERGED]

Fine-grained locking has been applied to many of the data structures in
the IPX/SPX protocol stack. While not fully MPSAFE at this point, it is
generally safe to use IPX/SPX without the Giant lock (in other words,
the debug.mpsafenet sysctl variable may be set to 1).

Unix domain sockets now support the LOCAL_CREDS and LOCAL_CONNWAIT
options. The LOCAL_CREDS option provides a mechanism for the receiver to
receive the credentials of the process as a recvmsg(2) control message.
The LOCAL_CONNWAIT option causes the connect(2) function to block until
accept(2) has been called on the listening socket. For more details, see
the unix(4) manual page.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

The amr(4) driver is now safe for use on systems using pae(4). [MERGED]

The ata(4) family of drivers has been overhauled and updated. It has
been split into modules that can be loaded and unloaded independently
(the atapci and ata modules are prerequisites for the device subdrivers,
which are atadisk, atapicd, atapifd, atapist, and ataraid). On supported
SATA controllers, devices can be hot inserted/removed. ATA RAID support
has been rewritten and supports a number of new metadata formats. The
atapicd driver no longer supports CD changers. This update has been
referred to as “ATA mkIII”.

The SHSEC GEOM class has been added. It provides for the sharing of a
secret between multiple GEOM providers. All of these providers must be
present in order to reveal the secret. This feature is controlled by the
gshsec(8) utility. [MERGED]

A new GEOM-based disk encryption facility, GEOM_ELI, has been added. It
uses the crypto(9) framework for hardware acceleration and supports
different cryptographic algorithms. See geli(8) for more information.
[MERGED]

The hptmv(4) driver, which supports the HighPoint RocketRAID 182x
series, has been added. [MERGED]

The ips(4) driver now support kernel crash dumps on some modern
ServeRAID models. [MERGED]

The matcd(4) driver has been removed. [MERGED]

The default SCSI boot-time probe delay in the GENERIC kernel has been
reduced from fifteen seconds to five seconds.

The old vinum(4) subsystem has been removed in favor of the new
geom(4)-based version.

The twa(4) driver has been updated to the 9.2 release (for FreeBSD
5.2.1) distributed from the 3ware website.

Information about newly-mounted cd9660 file systems (such as the
presence of RockRidge extensions) is now only printed if the kernel was
booted in verbose mode. This change was made to reduce the amount of
(generally unnecessary) kernel log messages. [MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.5 File Systems

Recomputing the summary information for “dirty” UFS and UFS2 file
systems is no longer done at mount time, but is now done by background
fsck(8). This change improves the startup speed when mounting large file
systems after a crash. The prior behavior can be restored by setting the
vfs.ffs.compute_summary_at_mount sysctl variable to a non-zero value.
[MERGED]

A kernel panic in the NFS server has been fixed. More details can be
found in errata note FreeBSD-EN-05:01.nfs. [MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.6 Contributed Software

ACPI-CA has been updated from 20040527 to 20041119. [MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Userland Changes

The bsdiff(1) and bspatch(1) binary diff and binary patching tools have
been added.

The burncd(8) utility now allows commands (such as eject) to take place
after fixating a disk.

Machine-specific optimized versions of bcmp(3), bcopy(3), bzero(3),
memcmp(3), memcpy(3), memmove(3), memset(3), strcat(3) and strcpy(3)
have been implemented. Several mathematics functions such as ceill(3)
and sqrtf(3) are also replaced with the optimized versions.

The chflags(1) utility now supports the -h flag, which supports changing
flags on symbolic links.

The env(1) program now supports a -v flag to write the command to
standard error before it is executed.

The env(1) program now supports a -S string option to split the string
and pass them to the command as the command-line arguments.

The env(1) program now supports a -P altpath option to set the command
search path used to look for the command.

The ftpd(8) program now uses the 212 and 213 status codes for directory
and file status correctly (211 was used in the previous versions). This
behavior is described in RFC 959. [MERGED]

The create command of the gpt(8) utility now supports a -f command-line
flag to force creation of a GPT even when there is an MBR record on a
disk. [MERGED]

The getaddrinfo(3) function now queries A DNS resource records before
AAAA records when AF_UNSPEC is specified. Some broken DNS servers return
NXDOMAIN against non-existent AAAA queries, even when it should return
NOERROR with empty return records. This is a problem for an IPv4/IPv6
dual stack node because the NXDOMAIN returned by the first query of an
AAAA record makes the querying server stop attempting to resolve the A
record if any. Also, this behavior has been recognized as a potential
denial-of-service attack (see http://www.kb.cert.org/vuls/id/714121 for
more details). Note that although the query order has been changed, the
returned result still includes AF_INET6 records before AF_INET records.
[MERGED]

The gethostbyname(3), gethostbyname2(3), and gethostbyaddr(3) functions
are now thread-safe. [MERGED]

The getnetent(3), getnetbyname(3), and getnetbyaddr(3) functions are now
thread-safe. [MERGED]

The getprotoent(3), getprotobyname(3), and getprotobynumber(3) functions
are now thread-safe. [MERGED]

The getservent(3), getservbyname(3), and getservbyport(3) functions are
now thread-safe. [MERGED]

For conformation to IEEE Std 1003.1-2001 (also known as POSIX 2001), the
n_net member of struct netent and the first argument of getnetbyaddr(3)
has been changed to an uint32_t. Due to these changes, the ABI on 64-bit
platforms is incompatible with previous releases of FreeBSD and the
major version number of the libpcap shared library has been bumped. On
64-bit platforms being upgraded from older FreeBSD versions, all
userland programs that use getnetbyaddr(3), getnetbyname(3),
getnetent(3), and/or libpcap have to be recompiled.

The gvinum(8) utility now supports the checkparity, rebuildparity, and
setstate subcommands. [MERGED]

The ifconfig(8) utility has been restructured. It is now more modular
and flexible with respect to supporting interface-specific
functionality. The 802.11 support has been updated to support recent
changes to the 802.11 subsystem and drivers.

The ifconfig(8) utility now supports a -tunnel parameter, which is just
an alias for deletetunnel, yet is more convenient and easier to type.

The -vlandev parameter to ifconfig(8) no longer requires a network
interface as its argument. The argument still is supported for backward
compatibility, but now it is deprecated and its use is discouraged.

Support for abbreviated forms of a number of ipfw(8) options has been
deprecated. Warnings are printed to stderr indicating the correct full
form when one of these abbreviations is detected.

The kldstat(8) utility now supports a -m option to return the status of
a specific kernel module. [MERGED]

The on-disk format of LC_CTYPE files has been changed to be
machine-independent.

The libkvm now supports ELF crash dumps on amd64 and i386 platforms,
large crash dumps (more than 4GB) on 32-bit platforms, and PAE crash
dumps on i386 platform.

The mixer(8) utility now supports the -S option. This is the same as the
-s option but does not output mixing field separators.

A bug in the libalias library which causes a core dump when the -reverse
option is specified in natd(8) has been fixed.

The libarchive library (as well as the tar(1) command that uses it) now
has support for reading ISO images (with optional RockRidge extensions)
and ZIP archives (with deflate and none compression). [MERGED]

The libarchive library now supports handling a ZIP archive entry with
more than 4GB compressed size (ZIP64 extension) and Unix extension.

The libgpib library has been added to give userland access to GPIB
devices (using the the pcii driver) via the ibfoo API. [MERGED]

The default stack sizes in libpthread, libthr, and libc_r have been
increased. On 32-bit platforms, the main thread receives a 2MB stack
size by default, with other threads receiving a 1MB stack size by
default. On 64-bit platforms, the default stack sizes are 4MB and 2MB
respectively. [MERGED]

The libxpg4 library has been removed because all of its functionality
was long ago merged into libc. All binaries linked with libxpg4 must be
recompiled or use libmap.conf(5). Note that the FreeBSD base system has
no such binaries.

The lpd(8) program now checks to make sure the data file has been
completely transfered before starting to print it when a data file
received from some other host. Some implementations of lpr(1) send the
control file for a print job before sending the matching data files,
which can cause problems if the receiving host is a busy print-server.
[MERGED]

A number of new functions have been implemented in the math(3) library.
These include ceill(3), floorl(3), ilogbl(3), fma(3) and variants,
lrint(3) and variants, and lround(3) and variants. [MERGED]

The mknod(8) utility is now deprecated. Device nodes have been managed
by the devfs(5) device file system since FreeBSD 5.0.

The moused(8) daemon now supports “virtual scrolling”, in which mouse
motions made while holding down the middle mouse button are interpreted
as scrolling. This feature is enabled with the -V flag. [MERGED]

A separate directory has been added for named(8) dynamic zones which is
owned by the bind user (for creation of the zone journal file). For more
detail, see an example dynamic zone in the sample named.conf(5).
[MERGED]

The ncal(1) utility now supports a -m flag to generate a calendar for a
specified month in the current year. [MERGED]

The newfs(8) utility now supports a -n flag to suppress the creation of
a .snap directory on new file systems. This feature is intended for use
on memory or vnode file systems that will not require snapshot support.
[MERGED]

The newfs(8) utility now emits a warning when creating a UFS or UFS2
file system that cannot support snapshots. This situation can occur in
the case of very large file systems with small block sizes. [MERGED]

The newsyslog(8) utility now supports a -d option to specify an
alternate root for log files similar to DESTDIR in the BSD make process.
This only affects log file paths, not configuration file (-f) or archive
directory (-a) paths.

The newsyslog(8) utility now supports a option -N that causes it not to
rotate any files.

The NO_NIS compile-time knob for userland has been added. As its name
implies, enabling this Makefile variable will cause NIS support to be
excluded from various programs and will cause the NIS utilities to not
be built. [MERGED]

For years, FreeBSD has used Makefile variables of the form NOFOO and
NO_FOO. For consistency, those variables using the former naming
convention have been converted to the NO_FOO form. The file
/usr/share/mk/bsd.compat.mk has a complete list of these variables; it
also implements some temporary backward compatibility for the old names.

The periodic(8) security output now supports the display of information
about blocked packet counts from pf(4). [MERGED]

The pgrep(1) command now supports a -S option which allows matching
system processes (kernel threads).

The pgrep(1) and pkill(1) commands now support a -F option, which
matches a process whose PID is stored in a file.

The pgrep(1) and pkill(1) commands now support a -i option to ignore
case in the process match.

The pgrep(1) and pkill(1) commands now support a -j option that matches
processes based on their jail(2) ID.

The pgrep(1) and pkill(1) commands now support a -o option which matches
only the oldest (least recently started) of the matching processes.

The portsnap(8) utility for downloading, updating, and extracting
compressed snapshots of the FreeBSD ports tree has been added.

The powerd(8) program for managing power consumption has been added.

The ppp(8) program now implements an echo parameter, which allows LCP
ECHOs to be enabled independently of LQR reports. Older versions of
ppp(8) would revert to LCP ECHO mode on negotiation failure. It is now
necessary to specify enable echo to get this behavior. [MERGED]

The disable NAS-IP-Address and disable NAS-Identifier options, which
support pre-RFC 2865 RADIUS servers have been added to the ppp(8)
program.

Two bugs in the pppd(8) program have been fixed. They may result in an
incorrect CBCP response, which violates the Microsoft PPP Callback
Control Protocol section 3.2. [MERGED]

The ps(1) utility now supports a jid keyword in the -o option. It
displays the jail(2) ID of each process.

The pstat(8) program now supports a -h option to print swap sizes with
SI prefixes such as K, M, and G, which are used to form binary
multiples.

The rescue(8) utilities in the /rescue directory now include bsdtar(1)
instead of GNU tar.

The restore(8) utility has regained the ability to read FreeBSD version
1 dump tapes. [MERGED]

A bug of the rexecd(8) utility which results in it behaving as if the -i
option is always specified has been fixed. [MERGED]

The rexecd(8) utility has been removed. There are no rexec clients in
the FreeBSD tree, and the client function rexec(3) is present only in
libcompat.

The rm(1) utility now supports an -I option that asks for confirmation
(once) if recursively removing directories or if more than 3 files are
listed in the command line. [MERGED]

The rm(1) utility now suppresses diagnostic messages when it attempts to
remove a non-existent directory with the -r and -f options specified.
This behavior is required by Version 3 of the Single UNIX Specification
(SUSv3).

The following ISO/IEC 9899:1999 standard functions have been
implemented: roundl(), lroundl(), llroundl(), truncl(), and floorl().

An rpmatch(3) library function has been added to check a string for
being an affirmative or negative response in the current locale.

The rtld(1) dynamic linker now supports specifying library replacements
via the LD_LIBMAP environment variable. This variable will override the
entries in libmap.conf(5). [MERGED]

The rune(3) non-standard multibyte and wide character support interface
has been removed.

sed(1) now supports a -l option to make its output line-buffered.
[MERGED]

The strftime(3) function now supports some GNU extensions such as - (no
padding), _ (use space as padding), and 0 (zero padding). [MERGED]

The syslog(3) function is now thread-safe. [MERGED]

The syslogd(8) utility now opens an additional domain socket
(/var/run/logpriv by default), with 0600 permissions to be used by
privileged programs. This prevents privileged programs from locking when
the domain sockets run out of buffer space due to a local
denial-of-service attack. [MERGED]

The syslogd(8) now supports the -S option, which changes the pathname of
the privileged socket. This is useful for preventing the daemon from
receiving any messages from the local sockets (/var/run/log and
/var/run/logpriv are used by default). [MERGED]

The syslogd(8) utility now allows : and % characters in the hostname
specifications. These characters are used in IPv6 addresses and scope
IDs. [MERGED]

The systat(1) -netstat display is now IPv6-aware. [MERGED]

The -f option of tail(1) utility now supports more than one file at a
time. [MERGED]

The telnet(1) and telnetd(8) programs now support the -S option for
specifying a numeric TOS byte.

Prepending a + character to port numbers passed to telnet(1) program
will now disable option negotiation and allow the transfer of characters
with the high bit set. This feature is intended to support the fairly
common use of telnet(1) as a protocol tester.

The tcpdrop(8) command, which closes a selected TCP connection, has been
added. It was obtained from OpenBSD. [MERGED]

what(1) now supports a -q flag, which causes it to print matching text,
but not format it.

whois(1) now supports a -k flag for querying whois.krnic.net (the
National Internet Development Agency of Korea), which holds details of
IP address allocations within Korea. [MERGED]

The -I option of the xargs(1) command has been changed to conform to
IEEE Std 1003.1-2004. The standard requires that the constructed
arguments cannot grow larger than 255 bytes.

A bug, which caused the last line of configuration files such as
hosts(5), services(5), and so on to be ignored if it did not end in a
newline character, has been fixed. [MERGED]

A new system user/group _dhcp has been added to support dhclient(8) from
OpenBSD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1 /etc/rc.d Scripts

The rc.d/bsnmpd startup script for bsnmpd(1) has been added.

The rc.d/jail startup script now supports jail_name_flags variable which
allows to specify jail(8) flags. [MERGED]

rc.conf(5) now supports changes of network interface names at boot time.
[MERGED] For example:

    ifconfig_fxp0_name="net0"
    ifconfig_net0="inet 10.0.0.1/16"

The rc.d/moused script now starts/stops/checks a specific device when
the device name is given as the second argument to the script:

    # /etc/rc.d/moused start ums0

To use different rc.conf(5) knobs with different mice, use the device
name as part of the knob. For example, if the mouse device is /dev/ums0
the following lines can be used:

    moused_ums0_enable=yes
    moused_ums0_flags="-z 4"
    moused_ums0_port="/dev/ums0"

rc.conf(5) now supports the tmpmfs_flags and varmfs_flags variables.
These can be used to pass extra options to the mdmfs(8) utility, to
customize the finer details of the md(4) file system creation, such as
to turn on/off softupdates, to specify a default owner for the file
system, and so on. [MERGED]

The following scripts have been removed because they were NetBSD
specific and never used in FreeBSD: altqd, dhcpd, dhcrelay,
downinterfaces, gated, ifwatchd, kdc, lkm1, lkm2, lkm3, mixerctl, mopd,
mountall, ndbootd, network, poffd, postfix, ppp, racoon, raidframe,
rbootd, rtsold, screenblank, swap2, sysdb, wscons, xdm, and xfs

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4 Contributed Software

awk has been updated from the 7 February 2004 release to the 24 April
2005 release.

BIND has been updated from version 9.3.0 to version 9.3.1. [MERGED]

bsnmp has been updated from 1.7 to 1.10.

bzip2 has been updated from 1.0.2 to 1.0.3.

OpenBSD dhclient as of OpenBSD 3.7 has been imported. It replaces the
ISC DHCP client used in prior versions of FreeBSD.

FILE has been updated from 4.10 to 4.12.

GNU GCC has been updated from from 3.4.2-prerelease as of 28 July, 2004
to 3.4.4.

A number of bug fixes and performance enhancements have been added to
GNU grep in the form of patches from Fedora's grep-2.5.1-48 source RPM.

GNU readline has been updated from version 4.3 to version 5.0.

IPFilter has been updated from 3.4.35 to 4.1.18.

Heimdal has been updated from 0.6.1 to 0.6.3. [MERGED]

The hostapd v0.3.9 has been imported. This is a user space IEEE 802.11
AP and IEEE 802.1X/WPA/WPA2/EAP Authenticator and RADIUS authentication
server. For more details, see hostapd(8).

libpcap has been updated from v0.8.3 to v0.9.1 (alpha 096).

libregex has been updated from a snapshot from GNU grep 2.5.1 to a
snapshot from the fedora-glibc-2_3_4-21 tag in the glibc CVS repository.

libz has been updated from 1.2.1 to 1.2.2.

lukemftp has been updated from a 26 April 2004 snapshot from NetBSD's
sources to a snapshot as of 16 May 2005.

A snapshot of netcat from OpenBSD as of 4 February 2005 has been added.
More information can be found in the nc(1) manual page. [MERGED]

NgATM has been updated from 1.0 to 1.2.

OpenPAM has been updated from the Eelgrass release to the Figwort
release.

OpenSSH has been updated from 3.8p1 to 4.1p1.

OpenSSL has been updated from 0.9.7d to 0.9.7e. [MERGED]

pf has been updated from the version included with OpenBSD 3.5 to the
version included with OpenBSD 3.7.

sendmail has been updated from version 8.13.3 to version 8.13.4. It now
supports OSTYPE(freebsd6).

tcpdump has been updated from v3.8.3 to v3.9.1 (alpha 096).

tcsh has been updated from 6.13.00 to 6.14.00.

texinfo has been updated from 4.6 to 4.8.

The timezone database has been updated from the tzdata2004e release to
the tzdata2004g release. [MERGED]

The WPA Supplicant v0.3.9 has been imported. This provides WPA
Supplicant component of WPA/IEEE 802.11i features. For more details, see
wpa_supplicant(8).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

The pkg_create(1) utility now supports a -R flag. When creating a
package file from the locally installed package, it creates package
files for all packages on which that locally installed package depends
if this flag is specified.

The pkg_version(1) utility now supports a -q flag to suppress the output
of the port version comparison characters <, =, and >.

The pkg_version(1) utility now supports a -I flag, which causes only the
INDEX file to be used for determining if a package is out of date.
[MERGED]

The ports/INDEX* files, which kept an index of all of the entries in the
ports collection, have been removed from the CVS repository. [MERGED]
These files were generated only infrequently, and therefore were usually
out-of-date and inaccurate. Users requiring an index file (such as for
use by programs such as portupgrade(1)) have two alternatives for
obtaining a copy:

-   Build an index file based on the current ports tree by running
    make index from the top of the ports/ tree.

-   Fetch an index file over the network by running make fetchindex from
    the top of the ports/ tree. This index file will (typically) be
    accurate to within a day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

In prior FreeBSD releases, the disc1 CD-ROM (or ISO image) was a
bootable installation disk containing the base system, ports tree, and
common packages. The disc2 CD-ROM (or ISO image) was a bootable “fix it”
disk with a live filesystem, to be used for making emergency repairs.
This layout has now changed. For all architectures except ia64, the
disc1 image now contains the base system distribution files, ports tree,
and the live filesystem, making it suitable for both an initial
installation and repair purposes. (On the ia64, the live filesystem is
on a separate disk due to its size.) Packages appear on separate disks;
in particular, the disc2 image contains commonly packages such as
desktop environments. Documents from the FreeBSD Documentation Project
also appear on disc2. [MERGED]

The supported version of the GNOME desktop environment has been updated
from 2.6.2 to 2.10.2. More information about running GNOME on FreeBSD
can be found on the FreeBSD GNOME Project Web page. [MERGED]

  Note: Users of older versions of the GNOME desktop (x11/gnome2) must
  take particular care in upgrading. Simply upgrading it from the
  FreeBSD Ports Collection with portupgrade(1) (sysutils/portupgrade)
  will cause serious problems. GNOME desktop users should read the
  instructions carefully at
  http://www.FreeBSD.org/gnome/docs/faq210.html and use the
  gnome_upgrade.sh script to properly upgrade to GNOME 2.10.

The supported version of the KDE desktop environment has been updated
from 3.3.0 to 3.4.2. More information regarding running KDE on FreeBSD
can be found on the KDE on FreeBSD Web page. [MERGED]

  Note: Users of older versions of KDE should follow the upgrading
  procedure documented on the KDE on FreeBSD Web page or in
  ports/UPDATING.

The supported version of Xorg has been updated from 6.7.0 to 6.8.2.
[MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7 Documentation

Documentation of existing functionality has been improved by the
addition of the following manual pages: acpi_ibm(4), acpi_sony(4),
ataraid(4), bus_space(9), central(4), clkbrd(4), creator(4),
devfs.conf(5), devfs.rules(5), ebus(4), eeprom(4), fhc(4), machfb(4),
ofw_console(4), openfirm(4), openprom(4), pmap_page_init(9),
pthread_atfork(3), rtc(4), sbus(4), sched_4bsd(4), sched_ule(4),
snd_fm801(4), snd_neomagic(4), snd_t4dwave(4), snd_via8233(4),
snd_via82c686(4), and snd_vibes(4).

Manual pages in the base system have received a number of cleanups, both
for content and presentation. Cross-references are more correct and
consistent, standard section headings are now used throughout, and
markup has been cleaned up.

The following manual pages, which were derived from RFCs and possibly
violate the IETF's copyrights, have been replaced: gai_strerror(3),
getaddrinfo(3), getnameinfo(3), inet6_opt_init(3),
inet6_option_space(3), inet6_rth_space(3), inet6_rthdr_space(3),
icmp6(4), and ip6(4). [MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

Source upgrades to FreeBSD 6.0-RELEASE are only supported from FreeBSD
5.3-RELEASE or later. Users of older systems wanting to upgrade
6.0-RELEASE will need to update to FreeBSD 5.3 or newer first, then to
FreeBSD 6.0-RELEASE.

  Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should, of course, only be attempted
  after backing up all data and configuration files.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
