[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   BSD Now
-   Discord
-   Events
-   Forums
-   IRC
-   Mailing Lists
-   Reddit
-   Twitter
-   User Groups
-   YouTube

Community

FreeBSD’s community is diverse and extensive, and can be found
everywhere great conversations and activity takes place. You’ll find our
community and spaces intelligent, welcoming and approachable.

The project maintains several official community spaces where
developers, contributors and users can find help and support, stay up to
date, coordinate and collaborate or just kick back, relax and socialise.

If you prefer asynchronous and long-lived communications channels,
FreeBSD offers over one hundred mailing lists covering a vast range of
topics, and provides web-based forums and several Usenet newsgroups.

For more real-time collaboration, we have a number of FreeBSD IRC
channels and an instance on Discord where you can find support, learn to
contribute, watch live streams and a whole lot more.

If you are interested in professional development and networking
opportunities then follow us on LinkedIn and join our official FreeBSD
LinkedIn Group.

For regularly run in-person and online meets, you might like to look
into our FreeBSD Events where we maintain a feed and calendar of
upcoming events. Last year there were 9 events around the world.

On twitter, you can follow @freebsd, @freebsdhelp, or @freebsdcore.

On Reddit, you can find the FreeBSD community here.

Beyond officially run community spaces, there are User Groups in 32
countries, along with highly active FreeBSD communities on Twitter,
StackOverflow, ServerFault, and MeetUp.com, among many other
technology-related spaces.

The FreeBSD wiki contains information about development and related
projects.

Video Content

On YouTube, we host an official FreeBSD channel with developer summits
and "office hours" events, and a BSD Conferences channel with full taped
presentations from FreeBSD technical conferences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: December 28, 2022 by Graham Perrin

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
