[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

FreeBSD Status Reports

Next Quarterly Status Report submissions (April - June) due: June 30th, 2023

If you are interested in submitting status reports or you are curious
about how the publication process works, please see our status report
process description.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the benefits of the FreeBSD development model is a focus on
centralized design and implementation, in which the operating system is
maintained in a central repository, and discussed on centrally
maintained lists. This allows for a high level of coordination between
authors of various components of the system, and allows policies to be
enforced over the entire system, covering issues ranging from
architecture to style. However, as the FreeBSD developer community has
grown, and the rate of both mailing list traffic and tree modifications
has increased, making it difficult even for the most dedicated developer
to remain on top of all the work going on in the tree.

The FreeBSD Status Report attempts to address this problem by providing
a vehicle that allows developers to make the broader community aware of
their on-going work on FreeBSD, both in and out of the central source
repository. For each project and sub-project, a one paragraph summary is
included, indicating progress since the last summary. If it is a new
project, or if a project has not submitted any prior status reports, a
short description may precede the status information.

Periodically, special status reports are prepared and published. One of
those are the developer summit reports. Developer summits are places
where developers meet in person to discuss issues related to the
project. They are definitely worth attending if one is interested in
making significant contributions to the Project and they are open to
anybody!

These status reports may be reproduced in whole or in part, as long as
the source is clearly identified and appropriate credit given.

2023

-   January, 2023 - March, 2023

2022

-   October, 2022 - December, 2022

-   July, 2022 - September, 2022

-   April, 2022 - June, 2022

-   January, 2022 - March, 2022

2021

-   October, 2021 - December, 2021

-   July, 2021 - September, 2021

-   April, 2021 - June, 2021

-   January, 2021 - March, 2021

2020

-   October, 2020 - December, 2020

-   July, 2020 - September, 2020

-   April, 2020 - June, 2020

-   January, 2020 - March, 2020

2019

-   October, 2019 - December, 2019

-   July, 2019 - September, 2019

-   April, 2019 - June, 2019

-   January, 2019 - March, 2019

2018

-   October, 2018 - December, 2018

-   October, 2017 - September, 2018

2017

-   July, 2017 - September, 2017

-   April, 2017 - June, 2017

-   January, 2017 - March, 2017

2016

-   October, 2016 - December, 2016

-   July, 2016 - September, 2016

-   April, 2016 - June, 2016

-   January, 2016 - March, 2016

2015

-   October, 2015 - December, 2015

-   July, 2015 - September, 2015

-   April, 2015 - June, 2015

-   January, 2015 - March, 2015

2014

-   October, 2014 - December, 2014

-   July, 2014 - September, 2014

-   April, 2014 - June, 2014

-   January, 2014 - March, 2014

2013

-   October, 2013 - December, 2013

-   EuroBSDcon 2013 Developer Summit Special

-   July, 2013 - September, 2013

-   April, 2013 - June, 2013

-   BSDCan 2013 Developer Summit Special

-   January, 2013 - March, 2013

2012

-   October, 2012 - December, 2012

-   July, 2012 - September, 2012

-   April, 2012 - June, 2012

-   January, 2012 - March, 2012

2011

-   October, 2011 - December, 2011

-   July, 2011 - September, 2011

-   April, 2011 - June, 2011

-   January, 2011 - March, 2011

2010

-   October, 2010 - December, 2010

-   July, 2010 - September, 2010

-   April, 2010 - June, 2010

-   January, 2010 - March, 2010

2009

-   October, 2009 - December, 2009

-   April, 2009 - September, 2009

-   January, 2009 - March, 2009

2008

-   October, 2008 - December, 2008

-   July, 2008 - September, 2008

-   April, 2008 - June, 2008

-   January, 2008 - March, 2008

2007

-   October, 2007 - December, 2007

-   July, 2007 - October, 2007

-   April, 2007 - June, 2007

-   January, 2007 - March, 2007

2006

-   October, 2006 - December, 2006

-   June, 2006 - October, 2006

-   April, 2006 - June, 2006

-   January, 2006 - March, 2006

2005

-   October, 2005 - December, 2005

-   July, 2005 - October, 2005

-   March, 2005 - June, 2005

-   January, 2005 - March, 2005

2004

-   July, 2004 - December, 2004

-   May, 2004 - June, 2004

-   March, 2004 - April, 2004

-   January, 2004 - February, 2004

2003

-   October, 2003 - December, 2003

-   March, 2003 - September, 2003

-   January, 2003 - February, 2003

2002

-   November, 2002 - December, 2002

-   September, 2002 - October, 2002

-   July, 2002 - August, 2002

-   May, 2002 - June, 2002

-   February, 2002 - April, 2002

-   December, 2001 - January, 2002

2001

-   November, 2001

-   September, 2001

-   August, 2001

-   July, 2001

-   June, 2001

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: April 17, 2023 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
