Skip site navigation (1) Skip section navigation (2)

Header And Logo

[FreeBSD]

.

Donate to FreeBSD

.

Peripheral Links

Search

Â 

Site Navigation

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

Section Navigation

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Multimedia
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Introduction

This bi-monthly report covers development activities on the FreeBSD
Project for December 2001 and January 2002. A variety of accomplishments
have been made over the last couple of months, including strong progress
relating to the KSE project, which brings Scheduler Activations to the
FreeBSD kernel, as well as less visible infrastructure projects such as
improvements to the mount interface, PAM integration work, and
translation efforts. Shortly following the deadline for this status
report, the BSD Conference and FreeBSD Developer Summit were held, and
will be covered in the next bi-monthly report at the end of March. Plans
are already under way for the USENIX Annual Technical Conference in
Monterey, CA, later this year, and all and sundry are encouraged to
attend to get further insight in FreeBSD development.

Robert Watson

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

-   "GEOM" - generalized block storage manipulation
-   Bluetooth stack for FreeBSD (Netgraph implementation)
-   FreeBSD C99 & POSIX Conformance Project
-   FreeBSD in Bulgarian
-   FreeBSD Java Project
-   jp.FreeBSD.org daily SNAPSHOTs project
-   jpman project
-   KAME
-   KSE Status Report
-   Netgraph ATM
-   New mount(2) API
-   Pluggable Authentication Modules
-   Revised {mode,log}page support for camcontrol
-   SMPng
-   TrustedBSD ACLs
-   TrustedBSD Audit
-   TrustedBSD MAC Implementation
-   USB stack maintenance

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

"GEOM" - generalized block storage manipulation

  ------------------------- ----------------------------------------
  Links                     
  Old concept paper here.   URL: http://www.FreeBSD.org/~phk/Geom/
  ------------------------- ----------------------------------------

Contact: Poul-Henning Kamp <phk@FreeBSD.org>

This project is now finally underway, thanks to DARPA and NAI getting a
sponsorship lined up. The infrastructure code and data structures are
currently taking form inside a userland simulation harness. Basic MBR
and BSD methods have been written and device attach/taste/dettach
algorithms been implemented and validated.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

Bluetooth stack for FreeBSD (Netgraph implementation)

  -------
  Links
  -------

Contact: Maksim Yevmenkin <m_evmenkin@yahoo.com>

The project is making progress. The goal is to design and implement Host
Controller Interface (HCI) and Link Layer Control and Adaptation
Protocol (L2CAP) layers using Netgraph framework. More distant goal is
to write support for Service Discovery Protocol (SDP) and RFCOMM
protocol (Serial port emulation over Bluetooth link) . All information
was obtained from Bluetooth Specification Book v1.1.

Project status: In progress. 1) Design: mostly complete, there are some
minor issues to be resolved. 2) Implementation: Kernel - HCI and L2CAP
Netgraph nodes have been implemented; 3) User space (API, library,
utilities) - in progress. 4) Testing: In progress. I do not have real
Bluetooth hardware at this point, so i wrote some tools that allow me to
test the code. Some of them will be used as foundation for future user
space utilities.

Issues: 1) Bluetooth hardware; I do not have real Bluetooth hardware, so
if people can donate hardware/specs it would be great. I promise to
write all required drivers and make them available. I also promise to
return hardware/specs on first request. 2) Project name; I would like to
see the name that reflects the following: it is a Bluetooth stack,
implementation is for FreeBSD and implementation is based on Netgraph
framework

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

FreeBSD C99 & POSIX Conformance Project

  ------- -------------------------------------------
  Links   
          URL: http://people.FreeBSD.org/~mike/c99/
  ------- -------------------------------------------

Contact: Mike Barcroft <mike@FreeBSD.org>
Contact: FreeBSD-Standards Mailing List <standards@FreeBSD.org>

A significant amount of progress was made in December and January,
particularly in the area of utility conformance. Several utilities were
updated to conform to SUSv3, they include: at(1), mailx(1), pwd(1),
split(1), and uudecode(1). Several patches have been submitted to
increase conformance in other utilities, they include: fold(1),
patch(1), m4(1), nice(1), pr(1), renice(1), wc(1), and xargs(1). These
are in the process of being reviewed and committed. Two new utilities
have been written, specifically pathchk(1) and tabs(1). These are also
being reviewed and will be committed shortly.

A patch which implements most of the requirements of scanf(3) is being
reviewed and is expected to be committed shortly. This will allow us to
MFC a number of new functions and headers. Additionally, work has
started on wide string and complex number support.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

FreeBSD in Bulgarian

  ------- ------------------------------------------
  Links   
          URL: http://www.FreeBSD-bg.ringlet.net/
          URL: http://people.FreeBSD.org/~roam/bg/
  ------- ------------------------------------------

Contact: Peter Pentchev <roam@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD in Bulgarian project aims to bring a more comfortable
working environment to Bulgarian users of the FreeBSD OS. This includes,
but is not limited to, font, keymap and locale support, translation of
the FreeBSD documentation into Bulgarian, local user groups and various
forms of on-line help channels and discussion forums to help Bulgarians
adopt and use FreeBSD.

A guide for using FreeBSD with Bulgarian settings has been put up on the
project's website. The CVS repository will be made public shortly,
linked to on the URL's above.

An independent project for making FreeBSD easier to use by Bulgarians
has appeared, http://www.FreeBSD-bg.org/. It also hosts a mailing list
for discussions of FreeBSD in Bulgarian, stable@FreeBSD-bg.org. For more
information about the mailing list, send an e-mail with "help" in the
message body to majordomo@FreeBSD-bg.org.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

FreeBSD Java Project

  ------- ----------------------------------
  Links   
          URL: http://www.FreeBSD.org/java
  ------- ----------------------------------

Contact: Greg Lewis <glewis@eyesbeyond.com>

The past two months have been an exciting time in the FreeBSD Java
Project with the signing of a license between the FreeBSD Foundation and
Sun allowing us access to updated JDK source code and the Java
Compatibility Kit (JCK). This license will also allow the project to
release a binary version of both the JDK and JRE once JCK testing is
complete. Work on this testing is under way with the project hopeful of
being able to make a binary release in the not too distant future.

In lieu of the binary release which was hoped for with FreeBSD 4.5 the
project will release an updated source patchset this weekend. This
patchset will feature further work on the FreeBSD "native" threads
subsystem from Bill Huey. Also, thanks to hard work by Joe Kelsey and
Fuyuhiko Maruyama, the patchset will for the first time feature a
working Java browser plugin!

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

jp.FreeBSD.org daily SNAPSHOTs project

  ------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  Links                           
  Project Webpage                 URL: http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/
  SNAPSHOTs Notes (in Japanese)   URL: http://www.jp.FreeBSD.org/snapshots/notes.html
  ------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------

Contact: Makoto Matsushita <matusita@jp.FreeBSD.org>

I've update OS of buildboxes to the latest FreeBSD 5-current and
4-stable. Everything goes fine. From January 2002, I've started a
webzine, SNAPSHOTS Notes (only Japanese version is available). SNAPSHOTs
Notes pickups tips and information especially for the people living with
FreeBSD 5-current/4-stable. Article or idea for SNAPSHOTs notes are
always welcome (you don't need to write in Japanese :-).

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

jpman project

  ----------------------------- ----------------------------------------
  Links                         
  jpman project (in Japanese)   URL: http://www.jp.FreeBSD.org/man-jp/
  ----------------------------- ----------------------------------------

Contact: Kazuo Horikawa <horikawa@FreeBSD.org>

For 4.5-RELEASE, port ja-man-doc-4.5.tgz is in sync with base system
except for OpenSSH pages (OpenSSH 2.3 based instead of 2.9) and perl5
pages (jpman project do not maintain). Section 3 updating has 55%
finished.

OKAZAKI Tetsurou has incorporated changes on base system's groff into
port japanese/groff. MORI Kouji has fixed two bugs of port japanese/man.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

KAME

  ------- ---------------------------
  Links   
          URL: http://www.kame.net/
  ------- ---------------------------

Contact: KAME core team <core@kame.net>

The KAME project is currently focusing on the scoped addressing
architecture, the advanced API implementation, NATPT and the mobile ipv6
implementation. Though these stuffs are not stable enough to be merge
into the FreeBSD tree, you can get and try them from the above URL.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

KSE Status Report

  ------------------ ------------------------------------------
  Links              
  Links from here.   URL: http://www.FreeBSD.org/~julian/
  Links from here.   URL: http://www.FreeBSD.org/~jasone/kse/
  ------------------ ------------------------------------------

Contact: Julian Elischer <julian@FreeBSD.org>

The KSE project (an attempt to support scalable thread in FreeBSD using
kernel support), has reached What I call "milestone 3". At this
milestone it is possible to run a multithreaded program on a single CPU
but with full concurrency of threads on that CPU. In other words the
kernel supports the fact that one thread can block by allowing another
thread to run in its place. A test program that demonstrates this is
available at the above website.

Milestone 4 will be to allow threads from the same program to run on
multiple CPUs but may require more input from the SMPng project. I am at
the moment (Feb 6) getting ready to commit a first set of changes for
milestone 3, that have no real effect but serve to drastically reduce
the complexity of the remaining diff so that others can read it more
easily. After changes to libkvm to support this diff have been added it
should be possible to run 'ps' and look at multiple threads in a treaded
process. I will be demonstrating KSE/M3 at BSDcon.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

Netgraph ATM

  ------- ----------------------------------------------------------
  Links   
          URL: ftp://ftp.fokus.gmd.de/pub/cc/cats/usr/harti/ngatm/
  ------- ----------------------------------------------------------

Contact: Harti Brandt <brandt@fokus.gmd.de>

The Netgraph ATM package has been split into a number of smaller
packages: bsnmp is a general-purpose SNMP daemon with support for
loadable modules. Two modules come with it: one implementing the
standard network-interface and IP related parts of MIB-2 and one for
interfacing other modules to the NetGraph sub-system. ngatmbase contains
the drivers for the ATM hardware, the ng_atm netgraph type and a few
test tools. This package allows one to use ATM PVCs. It should be
possible, for example, to do PPP over ATM with this package. Both bsnmp
and ngatmbase are available in version 1.0 under the link above. Two
other modules will be released in February: ngatmsig containing the
UNI-4.0 signalling stack as netgraph nodes and ngatmip containing CLIP
and LANE-2.0.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

New mount(2) API

Contact: Poul-Henning Kamp <phk@FreeBSD.org>
Contact: Maxime Henrion <mux@sneakerz.org>

Now that the patch has been mailed to the freebsd-arch@FreeBSD.org
mailing list, and that there were no objections, the commit will happen
soon. Poul is currently testing it in his own tree. After it has been
committed, it will be time to modify the filesystems in the tree to use
VFS_NMOUNT instead of VFS_MOUNT. Mount(8) will also need some
modifications. Some new manpages -- nmount(2) and kernel_vmount(9) --
are being created in the meantime.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

Pluggable Authentication Modules

  --------- --------------------------------------
  Links     
  OpenPAM   URL: http://openpam.sourceforge.net/
  --------- --------------------------------------

Contact: Mark Murray <markm@FreeBSD.org>
Contact: Dag-Erling SmÃ¸rgrav <des@FreeBSD.org>

OpenPAM, a new library intended to replace Linux-PAM in FreeBSD, has
been written and is undergoing integration testing. It is available for
download from the URL listed above.

In addition to this, a couple of new modules have been written
(pam_lastlog(8), pam_login_access(8)), and the pam_unix(8) module has
been extended to perform most of the tasks normally performed by
login(1), which is now fully PAMified.

The PAM FDP article has been put on hold until OpenPAM replaces
Linux-PAM in CVS, to avoid wasting effort on soon-to-be obsolete
documentation.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

Revised {mode,log}page support for camcontrol

Contact: Kelly Yancey <kbyanc@FreeBSD.org>

Extending camcontrol's page definition file format to include both
modepage and logpage definitions; adding support to camcontrol to query
and reset log page parameters. Consideration is being made to possibly
include support for diagnostic and vital product data pages, but that is
outside the current project scope. New page definition file format
includes capability to conditionally include page definitions based on
SCSI INQUIRY results allowing vendor-specific pages to be described
also. Approximately 90% complete.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

SMPng

  -------
  Links
  -------

Contact: smp@FreeBSD.org <smp@FreeBSD.org>

Alfred Perlstein committed file descriptor locking code which was
definitely a good push towards trying to lock down some important pieces
of global data. Peter Wemm has made progress on pmap cleanups for x86
SMP TLB shootdowns. Matt Dillon and John Baldwin have made progress on
getting patches done for moving accesses to ucred's out from under
Giant's protection. John Baldwin has also made some commits in order to
get the alpha port's SMP working. Matt Dillon has plans for hunting down
fileops locking issues in order to continue his previous Giant pushdown
work.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

TrustedBSD ACLs

  ------- -------------------------------------
  Links   
          URL: http://www.fxp.org/jedgar/ACL/
  ------- -------------------------------------

Contact: Chris Faulhaber <jedgar@FreeBSD.org>

Patches for cp(1), ls(1), and mv(1) to bring in POSIX.1e-compliant
Access Control List support have been updated to patch against builds of
-CURRENT. Other system utilities are currently being evaluated for ACL
support including install(1) (patch available) and mtree(8). Work is in
progress to verify the native getfacl(1), setfacl(1), and other
utilities build and work correctly on other ACL-enabled systems (e.g.
Linux w/ACL patches) and to help verify POSIX-compliance of the
continuing TrustedBSD work along with other systems. Finally,
experimental Perl and PHP modules are available allowing limited access
to native ACLs for languages other than C.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

TrustedBSD Audit

  ---------------------------- ---------------------------------
  Links                        
  TrustedBSD project website   URL: http://www.TrustedBSD.org/
  ---------------------------- ---------------------------------

Contact: trustedbsd-discuss <trustedbsd-discuss@TrustedBSD.org>

Robert Watson created the TrustedBSD audit perforce tree, which is a
branch from the TrustedBSD base tree, in order to start pushing
development efforts towards using a revision control system. Andrew
Reiter started to merge in some framework related code for generation of
audit records, enqueueing writes, and handling data writing. There is a
great deal of work to be done with updates and discussion on the
trustedbsd-discuss@TrustedBSD.org mailing list.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

TrustedBSD MAC Implementation

  ----------------------------- ---------------------------------
  Links                         
  TrustedBSD Project Web Site   URL: http://www.TrustedBSD.org/
  ----------------------------- ---------------------------------

Contact: Robert Watson <rwatson@FreeBSD.org>

Substantial progress has been made towards a working MAC implementation.
The focus over the last two months has been moving from a hard-coded
series of MAC policies to a more flexible implementation. A pluggable
policy framework has been created (and is still under development),
supporting Biba, MLS, TE, a "BSD Extended" model, and a sample mac_none
module. Some modules must be compiled in or loaded prior to boot; others
may be introduced at run-time. Support for networking has improved, with
improved handling of IP fragmentation in IPv4, support for various
pseudo-interfaces such as if_tun and if_tap, improved integration into
userland, NFS-related fixes, moving the VFS enforcement out of
individual filesystems, support for a 'multilevel' mount flag, support
for explicit labeling in procfs and devfs, addition of an 'extattrctl
lsattr' argument to list EAs on a filesystem, support for label ranges
in the Biba and MAC policies, and much more.

Targets for the next two months include more universal enforcement of
VFS-related calls, improved support for alternative ABIs, improved
flexibility of in-kernel subject and object labels, support for IPv6 and
IPsec, and improved support for NFS serving.

Development continues in the FreeBSD Perforce repository, which may be
accessed using cvsup.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

USB stack maintenance

Contact: Josef Karthauser <joe@FreeBSD.org>

I've been working to integrate recent improvements in the NetBSD usb
stack to FreeBSD -current. Both NetBSD and OpenBSD currently share the
same source, as FreeBSD did too at once point before it diverged. The
goal is to get back to that state, but there are many improvements on
both sides that need to be merged before this is complete.

I'm currently looking for someone to help maintain usb in -stable.
Please let me know if you're interested.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

News Home | Status Home

Site Map | Legal Notices | Â© 1995â2021 The FreeBSD Project. All rights
reserved.
