[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 4.6-RELEASE/4.6.2-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v 1.1.2.82
2002/09/16 23:08:45 bmah Exp $

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 4.6-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release. This information
  includes security advisories, as well as news relating to the software
  or documentation that could affect its operation or usability. An
  up-to-date version of this document should always be consulted before
  installing this version of FreeBSD.

  Unless otherwise noted, items listed here also pertain to FreeBSD
  4.6.2-RELEASE, which was designed to fix certain, specific problems in
  4.6-RELEASE (see the release notes for more details).

  This errata document for FreeBSD 4.6-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 4.7-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains ``late-breaking news'' about FreeBSD
4.6-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the ``current errata'' for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 4-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

FreeBSD 4.6-RELEASE contains a fix for a bug described in security
advisory SA-02:23 (which addressed the use of file descriptors by
set-user-id or set-group-id programs). An error has been discovered in
the bugfix; it is still possible for systems using procfs(5) or
linprocfs(5) to be exploited. A revised version of security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:23 contains a corrected bugfix. This problem was corrected
in FreeBSD 4.6.2-RELEASE.

A buffer overflow in the resolver could be exploited by a malicious
domain name server or an attacker forging DNS messages. This could
potentially be used to force arbitrary code to run on a client machine
with the privileges of a resolver-using application. See security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:28 for more information and a fix. This problem
was corrected in FreeBSD 4.6.2-RELEASE.

Badly-formed NFS packets could trigger a buffer overflow in tcpdump(1).
For a fix to this problem, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:29. This
problem was corrected in FreeBSD 4.6.2-RELEASE.

ktrace(1) can be used to trace the operation of formerly-privileged
processes. This is undesirable, as it is then possible to leak
information obtained while these processes had elevated privileges. See
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:30 for a workaround and a fix. This
problem was corrected in FreeBSD 4.6.2-RELEASE.

A race condition in pppd(8) can be used to change the permissions of an
arbitrary file. For more details, a workaround, and bugfix information,
see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:32. This problem was corrected in
FreeBSD 4.6.2-RELEASE.

Multiple buffer overflows have been discovered in OpenSSL. More details
(including workarounds and bugfixes) can be found in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:33. This problem was corrected in FreeBSD 4.6.2-RELEASE.

A bug in the XDR decoder (used by Sun RPC) could result in a heap buffer
overflow. Security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:34 contains workaround and
bugfix information. This problem was corrected in FreeBSD 4.6.2-RELEASE.

Local users can, under certain circumstances, read and write arbitrary
blocks on an FFS filesystem has been corrected. More details can be
found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:35, which contains a workaround
and bugfix information. This problem was corrected in FreeBSD
4.6.2-RELEASE.

A bug in the NFS server code could allow a remote denial of service
attack. Security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:36 has information on a fix and
a workaround. This problem was corrected in FreeBSD 4.6.2-RELEASE.

A bug in kqueue(2) could allow local users to panic a system. Correction
information is contained in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:37. This
problem was corrected in FreeBSD 4.6.2-RELEASE.

Several bounds-checking bugs in system calls could result in some system
calls returning a large portion of kernel memory. More details can be
found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:38. This problem was corrected
in time for FreeBSD 4.6.2-RELEASE, although not mentioned in the
accompanying release documentation.

A bug in libkvm could result in some applications leaking file
descriptors with access to potentially sensitive information. More
details, as well as a bugfix and a workaround, can be found in security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:39.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Late-Breaking News

In FreeBSD 4.6-RELEASE, the default maximum TCP window size was lowered
from 65536 bytes to 57334 bytes, for better compatability with some
versions of IPFilter.

A recently-discovered interaction between the FreeBSD kernel and the
archivers/zip port can result in some errors on the alpha platform. A
post-release fix has been committed to the FreeBSD ports tree; versions
of the archivers/zip port beginning with 2.3_1 will function correctly.

On the alpha platform, the de(4) and txp(4) drivers were moved from the
boot kernel on the floppy images to modules on the mfsroot floppy. This
change was made in order to get the alpha kernel to fit onto the boot
floppy. It should be transparent to all users, as sysinstall(8) will
automatically load any kernel modules it finds on the mfsroot floppy.

Several last-minute patches were made to the
x11-servers/XFree86-4-Server package. These allow the various server
configuration programs to give better support for the sysmouse device
supported by moused(8). The binary packages on the CDROMs and the FTP
sites incoporate this patch and bear the version number 4.2.0_3.
However, the ports collection included in the distribution does not
contain this patch. To get an updated version, use CVSup to obtain a
more recent ports collection.

Some FreeBSD/i386 users have experienced difficulties reading from
certain ATA CDROM drives. Specific models on which this problem has been
observed include the AOpen 48x, 52x, and 56x CDROM drives, as well as
the Mitsumi Slim CRMC-SR242S CDROM drive. A typical symptom is the
following error message on the console and/or dmesg(8) buffer (sometimes
accompanied by a kernel panic):

        acd0: READ_BIG command timeout - resetting
        ata1: resetting devices .. done

In some cases, this bug can prevent installation of FreeBSD from an
affected CDROM drive. It can cause sysinstall(8) to hang while
extracting distribution files from CD media.

A two-part workaround listed here has shown to be helpful in some (but
not necessarily all) cases. First, to allow a CDROM installation, it is
necessary to modify the normal CDROM installation procedure:

1.  Start the computer with a FreeBSD installation CDROM in the drive.

2.  Wait for a console message similar to:

            Hit [Enter] to boot immediately, or any other key for command prompt.
            Booting [kernel] in 9 seconds...

3.  Immediately interrupt the boot process by pressing the Space bar on
    the keyboard.

4.  Enter the following three lines at the ok prompt:

            ok set hw.ata.ata_dma="1"

            ok set hw.ata.atapi_dma="1"

            ok boot

5.  Continue the installation as normal.

The second part of the workaround takes place after completing the CDROM
installation (or a successful source upgrade). It consists of
configuring the ata(4) driver so that future CDROM reads work correctly:

1.  Add the following two lines to /boot/loader.conf (creating this file
    if it does not already exist):

            hw.ata.ata_dma="1"
            hw.ata.atapi_dma="1"

2.  Reboot the machine.

This problem was fixed in FreeBSD 4.7-PRERELEASE on 31 July 2002, as
well as FreeBSD 4.6.2-RELEASE.

Due to a bug in the release generation process, some of the directories
under /usr/share/examples are empty (most notably
/usr/share/examples/cvsup). A partial workaround is to install the
sshare distribution via sysinstall(8) (from the main menu, choose
Configure, Distributions, src, then share). /usr/src/share/examples will
then contain the missing files. This problem was corrected in FreeBSD
4.7-PRERELEASE on 16 July 2002, as well as FreeBSD 4.6.2-RELEASE.

The item in the ``Filesystems'' section of the release notes contains a
small grammatical error. It should read: ``A bug has been fixed in soft
updates that could cause occasional filesystem corruption if the system
is shut down immediately after performing heavy filesystem activities,
such as installing a new kernel or other software.''

Due to an omission, pkg_add -r on 4.6-RELEASE or 4.6.2-RELEASE may
attempt to fetch packages built for FreeBSD -STABLE, rather than for the
appropriate release. As a workaround, set the PACKAGESITE environment
variable appropriately before invoking pkg_add(1). For example, a csh(1)
user on 4.6.2-RELEASE could use:

        % setenv PACKAGESITE \
        ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/ports/i386/packages-4.6.2-release/Latest/

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 4-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
