[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

FreeBSD Release Engineering Team

Links:
FreeBSD 13.1-RELEASE schedule URL:
https://www.freebsd.org/releases/13.1R/schedule/
FreeBSD 13.1 Release Information URL:
https://www.freebsd.org/releases/13.1R/ [link added by status report
team as this quarterly status report is being published after
13.1-RELEASE has been released]
FreeBSD releases URL:
https://download.freebsd.org/ftp/releases/ISO-IMAGES/
FreeBSD development snapshots URL:
https://download.freebsd.org/ftp/snapshots/ISO-IMAGES/

Contact: FreeBSD Release Engineering Team, <re@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Release Engineering Team is responsible for setting and
publishing release schedules for official project releases of FreeBSD,
announcing code freezes and maintaining the respective branches, among
other things.

During the first quarter of 2022, the Release Engineering Team completed
work on, and submitted to the developers the 13.1-RELEASE schedule. This
will be the second point release from the stable/13 branch. As of this
writing, three BETA builds have been run, with at least two RC builds
before the final release, currently scheduled for April 21, 2022.

We look forward to another consistently stable release at the end of
this cycle, as well as many more to come for other branches moving
forward.

Additionally throughout the quarter, several development snapshots
builds were released for the main, stable/13, and stable/12 branches.

Sponsor: Rubicon Communications, LLC ("Netgate") Sponsor: The FreeBSD
Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: June 3, 2022 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
