[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Intel Wireless driver support

Links:
iwlwifi status FreeBSD wiki page URL:
https://wiki.freebsd.org/WiFi/Iwlwifi

Contact: Bjoern A. Zeeb <bz@FreeBSD.ORG>

The Intel Wireless driver update project aims to bring support for newer
chipsets along with mac80211 LinuxKPI compat code. The dual-licensed
Intel driver code was ported in the past for the iwm(4) native driver;
using the LinuxKPI compat framework allows us to use the driver
directly, with only very minor modificationsi that we hope will be
incorporated into the original driver.

After the initial snapshot at the end of June, another snapshot was
released in early September. Thank you to everyone testing on CURRENT
and reporting back.

While we keep updating the driver and all the compat code needed for
that, the focus now is on stability and adding support for newer 802.11
standards. The driver is currently set to 11a/b/g and 11n will be next
before we look at 11ac.

We are currently trying to get as much into FreeBSD as is possible and
makes sense. Full integration into FreeBSD main is waiting for a policy
update.

For the latest state of the development or code, please follow the
referenced wiki page or the freebsd-wireless mailing list. We expect to
release another snapshot soon and hope to also support stable/13 again
with that one.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: November 15, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
