[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Intel Wireless driver support and LinuxKPI 802.11 compatibility layer

Links:
iwlwifi status FreeBSD wiki page URL:
https://wiki.freebsd.org/WiFi/Iwlwifi

Contact: Bjoern A. Zeeb <bz@FreeBSD.org>

The Intel Wireless driver update project aims to bring support for newer
chipsets along with mac80211 LinuxKPI compat code. The dual-licensed
Intel driver code was ported in the past for the iwm(4) native driver;
using the LinuxKPI compat framework allows us to use the driver directly
and gives support to all the latest chipsets, with only minor local
modifications. Some of the changes made while porting the driver to
FreeBSD were kindly incorporated into the upstream Linux driver already.

During the first quarter work continued with about 70 commits. Updating
the driver and firmware reduced differences to the Linux version and
gave us bugfixes and improvements. Changes to the LinuxKPI 802.11
compatibility layer were made to avoid firmware crashes and possible
panics for users along with other improvements.

Auto-loading support for LinuxKPI PCI drivers was comitted. This means
that iwlwifi(4) will now load automatically during boot if a supported
card is detected without any user interactions. Considering the current
state of the driver and the next release a decision was made that iwm(4)
supported chipsets will continue to attach to iwm(4) for now and only
newer and otherwise unsupported chipsets will use the iwlwifi(4) driver.
This is likely going to change in CURRENT as soon as iwlwifi(4) provides
better support than iwm(4).

The code was merged to the stable/13 branch and the current state will
be shipped with the upcoming 13.1-RELEASE.

In addition to The FreeBSD Foundation thanks need to go to all users who
have been testing and reporting back or are patiently waiting for the
next update. For the latest state of the development, please follow the
freebsd-wireless mailing list.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: June 3, 2022 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
