[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/ia64 5.3-RELEASE Hardware Notes

The FreeBSD Documentation Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 The FreeBSD Documentation
Project

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 Supported Processors and Motherboards

2.1 Supported Devices Overview

3 Supported Devices

3.1 Disk Controllers

3.2 Ethernet Interfaces

3.3 FDDI Interfaces

3.4 ATM Interfaces

3.5 Wireless Network Interfaces

3.6 Miscellaneous Networks

3.7 ISDN Interfaces

3.8 Serial Interfaces

3.9 Audio Devices

3.10 Camera and Video Capture Devices

3.11 USB Devices

3.12 IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Devices

3.13 Bluetooth Devices

3.14 Cryptographic Accelerators

3.15 Miscellaneous

  This is a preliminary document. It is incomplete, and in need of
  additional content. Please send additional information on IA-64
  processors, motherboards, and various devices working on FreeBSD to
  the FreeBSD IA64 porting mailing list.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This document contains the hardware compatibility notes for FreeBSD
5.3-RELEASE on the IA-64 hardware platform (also referred to as
FreeBSD/ia64 5.3-RELEASE). It lists devices known to work on this
platform, as well as some notes on boot-time kernel customization that
may be useful when attempting to configure support for new devices.

  Note: This document includes information specific to the IA-64
  hardware platform. Versions of the hardware compatibility notes for
  other architectures will differ in some details.

More information on FreeBSD/ia64 is contained on the FreeBSD/ia64
Project page.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Supported Processors and Motherboards

Currently supported processors are the Itanium and the Itanium 2.

Supported chipsets include:

-   HP zx1 (only on development branch, see the Perforce repository)

-   HP i2000

-   Intel 460GX

-   Intel E8870

Both Uniprocessor (UP) and Symmetric Multi-processor (SMP)
configurations are under active development. At this time, SMP-enabled
systems are considered less stable. The current priorities are UP fixes
to improve stability.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Supported Devices Overview

This section contains additional information about what devices may or
may not be supported by FreeBSD/ia64.

Except for the PC chipset embedded ata(4) controllers, most should work
out of the box. Eventually, all ia64-compatible ATA controllers are
expected to be fully supported. Refer to the following sections for
various disk controllers and their current status.

In general, ``PC standard'' serial ports supported by the sio(4) driver
are expected to work on Intel legacy machines, but not PA legacy
machines. The reason is that all devices on HP machines are
memory-mapped and there is no ISA device support other than the PCI
dictated VGA legacy.

In addition to sio(4) devices, the following devices fail on non-Intel
legacy machines (but should work on boxes with an Intel legacy) because
their drivers make ISA-specific assumptions that do not hold:

  ------------------ ----------------------------------
  sio(4)             No support for memory-mapped I/O
  syscons(4)         Expect BIOS, VGA probes, etc.
  pcm(4)             Probes MSS ISA ports ad nauseum
  atkbd(4), psm(4)   Fixed ISA port locations
  ------------------ ----------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Supported Devices

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/hardware/common/dev.sgml,v
1.227.2.14.2.1 2004/11/03 00:18:51 simon Exp $

This section describes the devices currently known to be supported by
with FreeBSD on the IA-64 platform. Other configurations may also work,
but simply have not been tested yet. Feedback, updates, and corrections
to this list are encouraged.

Where possible, the drivers applicable to each device or class of
devices is listed. If the driver in question has a manual page in the
FreeBSD base distribution (most should), it is referenced here.
Information on specific models of supported devices, controllers, etc.
can be found in the manual pages.

  Note: The device lists in this document are being generated
  automatically from FreeBSD manual pages. This means that some devices,
  which are supported by multiple drivers, may appear multiple times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1 Disk Controllers

IDE/ATA controllers ( ata(4) driver)

The ahc(4) driver supports the following SCSI host adapter chips and
SCSI controller cards:

-   Adaptec AIC7770 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7850 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7860 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7870 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7880 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7890 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7891 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7892 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7895 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7896 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7897 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7899 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec 274X(W)

-   Adaptec 274X(T)

-   Adaptec 284X

-   Adaptec 2910

-   Adaptec 2915

-   Adaptec 2920

-   Adaptec 2930C

-   Adaptec 2930U2

-   Adaptec 2940

-   Adaptec 2940J

-   Adaptec 2940N

-   Adaptec 2940U

-   Adaptec 2940AU

-   Adaptec 2940UW

-   Adaptec 2940UW Dual

-   Adaptec 2940UW Pro

-   Adaptec 2940U2W

-   Adaptec 2940U2B

-   Adaptec 2950U2W

-   Adaptec 2950U2B

-   Adaptec 19160B

-   Adaptec 29160B

-   Adaptec 29160N

-   Adaptec 3940

-   Adaptec 3940U

-   Adaptec 3940AU

-   Adaptec 3940UW

-   Adaptec 3940AUW

-   Adaptec 3940U2W

-   Adaptec 3950U2

-   Adaptec 3960

-   Adaptec 39160

-   Adaptec 3985

-   Adaptec 4944UW

-   NEC PC-9821Xt13 (PC-98)

-   NEC RvII26 (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B02L/B09 (PC-98)

-   NEC SV-98/2-B03 (PC-98)

-   Many motherboards with on-board SCSI support

The ahd(4) driver supports the following:

-   Adaptec AIC7901 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7901A host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7902 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec 29320 host adapter

-   Adaptec 39320 host adapter

-   Many motherboards with on-board SCSI support

Controllers supported by the aac(4) driver include:

-   Adaptec AAC-364

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 2120S

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 2130S

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 2200S

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 2410SA

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 2810SA

-   Adaptec SCSI RAID 5400S

-   Dell CERC SATA RAID 2

-   Dell PERC 2/Si

-   Dell PERC 2/QC

-   Dell PERC 3/Si

-   Dell PERC 3/Di

-   Dell PERC 320/DC

-   HP NetRAID 4M

The dpt(4) driver provides support for the following RAID adapters:

-   DPT Smart Cache Plus

-   Smart Cache II (PM2?2?, PM2022 [EISA], PM2024/PM2124 [PCI]) (Gen2)

-   Smart RAID II (PM3?2?, PM3021, PM3222)

-   Smart Cache III (PM2?3?)

-   Smart RAID III (PM3?3?, PM3332 [EISA], PM3334UW [PCI]) (Gen3)

-   Smart Cache IV (PM2?4?, PM2042 [EISA], PM2044/PM2144 [PCI]) (Gen4)

-   Smart RAID IV

The amr(4) driver supports the following:

-   AMI MegaRAID 320-1

-   AMI MegaRAID 320-2

-   AMI MegaRAID 320-4X

-   AMI MegaRAID Series 418

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1200 (Series 428)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1300 (Series 434)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1400 (Series 438)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1500 (Series 467)

-   AMI MegaRAID Enterprise 1600 (Series 471)

-   AMI MegaRAID Elite 1500 (Series 467)

-   AMI MegaRAID Elite 1600 (Series 493)

-   AMI MegaRAID Elite 1650 (Series 4xx)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 100 (Series 466WS)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 200 (Series 466)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 300 (Series 490)

-   AMI MegaRAID Express 500 (Series 475)

-   Dell PERC

-   Dell PERC 2/SC

-   Dell PERC 2/DC

-   Dell PERC 3/DCL

-   Dell PERC 3/QC

-   Dell PERC 4/Di

-   HP NetRAID-1/Si

-   HP NetRAID-3/Si (D4943A)

-   HP Embedded NetRAID

Controllers supported by the mlx(4) driver include:

-   Mylex DAC960P

-   Mylex DAC960PD / DEC KZPSC (Fast Wide)

-   Mylex DAC960PDU

-   Mylex DAC960PL

-   Mylex DAC960PJ

-   Mylex DAC960PG

-   Mylex DAC960PU / DEC PZPAC (Ultra Wide)

-   Mylex AcceleRAID 150 (DAC960PRL)

-   Mylex AcceleRAID 250 (DAC960PTL1)

-   Mylex eXtremeRAID 1100 (DAC1164P)

-   RAIDarray 230 controllers, aka the Ultra-SCSI DEC KZPAC-AA (1-ch,
    4MB cache), KZPAC-CA (3-ch, 4MB), KZPAC-CB (3-ch, 8MB cache)

All major firmware revisions (2.x, 3.x, 4.x and 5.x) are supported,
however it is always advisable to upgrade to the most recent firmware
available for the controller. Compatible Mylex controllers not listed
should work, but have not been verified.

Controllers supported by the mly(4) driver include:

-   Mylex AcceleRAID 160

-   Mylex AcceleRAID 170

-   Mylex AcceleRAID 352

-   Mylex eXtremeRAID 2000

-   Mylex eXtremeRAID 3000

Compatible Mylex controllers not listed should work, but have not been
verified.

The sym(4) driver provides support for the following Symbios/LSI Logic
PCI SCSI controllers:

-   53C810

-   53C810A

-   53C815

-   53C825

-   53C825A

-   53C860

-   53C875

-   53C876

-   53C895

-   53C895A

-   53C896

-   53C897

-   53C1000

-   53C1000R

-   53C1010-33

-   53C1010-66

-   53C1510D

The SCSI controllers supported by sym(4) can be either embedded on a
motherboard, or on one of the following add-on boards:

-   ASUS SC-200, SC-896

-   Data Technology DTC3130 (all variants)

-   DawiControl DC2976UW

-   Diamond FirePort (all)

-   I-O DATA SC-UPCI (PC-98)

-   Logitec LHA-521UA (PC-98)

-   NCR cards (all)

-   Symbios cards (all)

-   Tekram DC390W, 390U, 390F, 390U2B, 390U2W, 390U3D, and 390U3W

-   Tyan S1365

Cards supported by the isp(4) driver include:

-   ISP1000

-   PTI SBS440

-   ISP1020

-   ISP1040

-   PTI SBS450

-   Qlogic 1240

-   Qlogic 1020

-   Qlogic 1040

-   Qlogic 1080

-   Qlogic 1280

-   Qlogic 12160

-   Qlogic 2100

-   Qlogic 2102

-   Qlogic 2200

-   Qlogic 2202

-   Qlogic 2204

-   Qlogic 2300

-   Qlogic 2312

-   PTI SBS470

-   Antares P-0033

Controllers supported by the ciss(4) driver include:

-   Compaq Smart Array 5300

-   Compaq Smart Array 532

-   Compaq Smart Array 5i

-   HP Smart Array 5312

-   HP Smart Array 6i

-   HP Smart Array 641

-   HP Smart Array 642

-   HP Smart Array 6400

-   HP Smart Array 6400 EM

-   HP Smart Array 6422

-   HP Smart Array V100

-   HP Modular Smart Array 20 (MSA20)

-   HP Modular Smart Array 500 (MSA500)

Controllers supported by the iir(4) driver include:

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCMR

-   Intel Server RAID Controller U3-l (SRCU31a)

-   Intel Server RAID Controller U3-1L (SRCU31La)

-   Intel Server RAID Controller U3-2 (SRCU32)

-   All past and future releases of Intel and ICP RAID Controllers.

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCU21 (discontinued)

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCU31 (older revision, not compatible)

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCU31L (older revision, not compatible)

The SRCU31 and SRCU31L can be updated via a firmware update available
from Intel.

The following controllers are supported by the mpt(4) driver:

-   LSI Logic 53c1030 (Dual Ultra320 SCSI)

-   LSI Logic FC909 (1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC909A (Dual 1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC919 (2Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC929 (Dual 2Gb/s Fibre Channel)

The SCSI controller chips supprted by the mpt(4) driver can be found
onboard on many systems including:

-   Dell PowerEdge 1750

-   IBM eServer xSeries 335

With all supported SCSI controllers, full support is provided for
SCSI-I, SCSI-II, and SCSI-III peripherals, including hard disks, optical
disks, tape drives (including DAT, 8mm Exabyte, Mammoth, and DLT),
medium changers, processor target devices and CD-ROM drives. WORM
devices that support CD-ROM commands are supported for read-only access
by the CD-ROM drivers (such as cd(4)). WORM/CD-R/CD-RW writing support
is provided by cdrecord(1), which is a part of the sysutils/cdrtools
port in the Ports Collection.

The following CD-ROM type systems are supported at this time:

-   SCSI interface (also includes ProAudio Spectrum and SoundBlaster
    SCSI) (cd(4))

-   ATAPI IDE interface ( acd(4))

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2 Ethernet Interfaces

Adapters supported by the sf(4) driver include:

-   ANA-62011 64-bit single port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62022 64-bit dual port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62044 64-bit quad port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-69011 32-bit single port 10/100baseTX adapter

-   ANA-62020 64-bit single port 100baseFX adapter

The pcn(4) driver supports adapters and embedded controllers based on
the AMD PCnet/FAST, PCnet/FAST+, PCnet/FAST III, PCnet/PRO and
PCnet/Home Fast Ethernet chips:

-   AMD Am53C974/Am79C970/Am79C974 PCnet-PCI

-   AMD Am79C970A PCnet-PCI II

-   AMD Am79C971 PCnet-FAST

-   AMD Am79C972 PCnet-FAST+

-   AMD Am79C973/Am79C975 PCnet-FAST III

-   AMD Am79C976 PCnet-PRO

-   AMD PCnet/Home HomePNA

-   Allied-Telesis LA-PCI

-   Contec C-NET(98)S (PC-98)

-   NEC SV-98/2-B05, B06

Adapters supported by the rl(4) driver include:

-   Accton ``Cheetah'' EN1207D (MPX 5030/5038; RealTek 8139 clone)

-   Allied Telesyn AT2550

-   Allied Telesyn AT2500TX

-   Belkin F5D5000

-   BUFFALO(Melco INC.) LPC-CB-CLX(CardBus)

-   Compaq HNE-300

-   CompUSA no-name 10/100 PCI Ethernet NIC

-   Corega FEther CB-TXD

-   Corega FEtherII CB-TXD

-   D-Link DFE-530TX+

-   D-Link DFE-538TX (same as 530+?)

-   D-Link DFE-690TXD

-   Edimax EP-4103DL CardBus

-   Encore ENL832-TX 10/100 M PCI

-   Farallon NetLINE 10/100 PCI

-   Genius GF100TXR,

-   GigaFast Ethernet EE100-AXP

-   KTX-9130TX 10/100 Fast Ethernet

-   LevelOne FPC-0106TX

-   Longshine LCS-8038TX-R

-   NDC Communications NE100TX-E

-   Netronix Inc. EA-1210 NetEther 10/100

-   Nortel Networks 10/100BaseTX

-   OvisLink LEF-8129TX

-   OvisLink LEF-8139TX

-   Peppercon AG ROL-F

-   Planex FNW-3800-TX

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 PCI 1211-TX

-   SOHO(PRAGMATIC) UE-1211C

The sis(4) driver supports Silicon Integrated Systems SiS 900 and SiS
7016 based Fast Ethernet adapters and embedded controllers, as well as
Fast Ethernet adapters based on the National Semiconductor DP83815
(MacPhyter) chip. Supported adapters include:

-   @Nifty FNECHARD IFC USUP-TX

-   MELCO LGY-PCI-TXC

-   Netgear FA311-TX (DP83815)

-   Netgear FA312-TX (DP83815)

-   SiS 630, 635, and 735 motherboard chipsets

The dc(4) driver provides support for the following chipsets:

-   DEC/Intel 21143

-   ADMtek AL981 Comet, AN985 Centaur, ADM9511 Centaur II and ADM9513
    Centaur II

-   ASIX Electronics AX88140A and AX88141

-   Conexant LANfinity RS7112 (miniPCI)

-   Davicom DM9009, DM9100, DM9102 and DM9102A

-   Lite-On 82c168 and 82c169 PNIC

-   Lite-On/Macronix 82c115 PNIC II

-   Macronix 98713, 98713A, 98715, 98715A, 98715AEC-C, 98725, 98727 and
    98732

-   Xircom X3201 (cardbus only)

The following NICs are known to work with the dc(4) driver at this time:

-   3Com OfficeConnect 10/100B (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Abocom FE2500

-   Accton EN1217 (98715A)

-   Accton EN2242 MiniPCI

-   Adico AE310TX (98715A)

-   Alfa Inc GFC2204 (ASIX AX88140A)

-   Built in 10Mbps only Ethernet on Compaq Presario 7900 series
    desktops (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in DE500-BA on DEC Alpha workstations (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in Sun DMFE 10/100 Mbps Ethernet on Sun Netra X1 and Sun Fire
    V100 (DM9102A, MII)

-   Built in Ethernet on LinkSys EtherFast 10/100 Instant GigaDrive
    (DM9102, MII)

-   CNet Pro110B (ASIX AX88140A)

-   CNet Pro120A (98715A or 98713A) and CNet Pro120B (98715)

-   Compex RL100-TX (98713 or 98713A)

-   D-Link DFE-570TX (21143, MII, quad port)

-   Digital DE500-BA 10/100 (21143, non-MII)

-   ELECOM Laneed LD-CBL/TXA (ADMtek AN985)

-   Hawking CB102 CardBus

-   IBM EtherJet Cardbus Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 Mobile Cardbus (versions that use the X3201 chipset)

-   Jaton XpressNet (Davicom DM9102)

-   Kingston KNE100TX (21143, MII)

-   Kingston KNE110TX (PNIC 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v2.0 (PNIC II 82c115)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v4.0/4.1 (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Matrox FastNIC 10/100 (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   Melco LGY-PCI-TXL

-   Microsoft MN-120 10/100 CardBus (ADMTek Centaur-C)

-   Microsoft MN-130 10/100 PCI (ADMTek Centaur-P)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A (98713A)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A Rev B4 (98715AEC-C)

-   NetGear FA310-TX Rev. D1, D2 or D3 (PNIC 82c169)

-   Netgear FA511

-   PlaneX FNW-3602-T (ADMtek AN985)

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 1233A-TX (ADMtek AN985)

-   SVEC PN102-TX (98713)

-   Xircom Cardbus Realport

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet 10/100

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet II 10/100

Adapters supported by the aue(4) driver include:

-   Abocom UFE1000, DSB650TX_NA

-   Accton USB320-EC, SpeedStream

-   ADMtek AN986, AN8511

-   Billionton USB100, USB100LP, USB100EL, USBE100

-   Corega Ether FEther USB-T, FEther USB-TX, FEther USB-TXS

-   D-Link DSB-650, DSB-650TX, DSB-650TX-PNA

-   Elecom LD-USBL/TX

-   Elsa Microlink USB2Ethernet

-   HP hn210e

-   I-O Data USB ETTX

-   Kingston KNU101TX

-   LinkSys USB10T adapters that contain the AN986 Pegasus chipset,
    USB10TA, USB10TX, USB100TX, USB100H1

-   MELCO LUA-TX, LUA2-TX

-   Planex UE-200TX

-   Sandberg USB to Network Link (model number 133-06)

-   Siemens Speedstream

-   SmartBridges smartNIC

-   SMC 2202USB

-   SOHOware NUB100

The cue(4) driver supports CATC USB-EL1210A based USB Ethernet adapters
including:

-   Belkin F5U011/F5U111

-   CATC Netmate

-   CATC Netmate II

-   SmartBridges SmartLink

The kue(4) driver supports Kawasaki LSI KL5KLUSB101B based USB Ethernet
adapters including:

-   3Com 3c19250

-   3Com 3c460 HomeConnect Ethernet USB Adapter

-   ADS Technologies USB-10BT

-   AOX USB101

-   ATen UC10T

-   Abocom URE 450

-   Corega USB-T

-   D-Link DSB-650C

-   Entrega NET-USB-E45, NET-HUB-3U1E

-   I/O Data USB ETT

-   Kawasaki DU-H3E

-   LinkSys USB10T

-   Netgear EA101

-   Peracom USB Ethernet Adapter

-   SMC 2102USB, 2104USB

Adapters supported by the de(4) driver include:

-   Adaptec ANA-6944/TX

-   Cogent EM100FX and EM440TX

-   Corega FastEther PCI-TX

-   D-Link DFE-500TX

-   DEC DE435, DE425, DEC DE450, and DEC DE500

-   ELECOM LD-PCI2T, LD-PCITS

-   I-O DATA LA2/T-PCI

-   SMC Etherpower 8432, 9332 and 9334

-   ZNYX ZX3xx

Adapters supported by the fxp(4) driver include:

-   Intel EtherExpress PRO/10

-   Intel InBusiness 10/100

-   Intel PRO/100B / EtherExpressPRO/100 B PCI Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100+ Management Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 VE Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 M Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 S Desktop, Server and Dual-Port Server Adapters

-   Contec C-NET(PI)-100TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821Ra20, Rv20, Xv13, Xv20 internal 100Base-TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B06 (PC-98)

-   Many on-board network interfaces on Intel motherboards

The xl(4) driver supports the following hardware:

-   3Com 3c900-TPO

-   3Com 3c900-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905-TX

-   3Com 3c905-T4

-   3Com 3c900B-TPO

-   3Com 3c900B-TPC

-   3Com 3c900B-FL

-   3Com 3c900B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905B-T4

-   3Com 3c905B-TX

-   3Com 3c905B-FX

-   3Com 3c905B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905C-TX

-   3Com 3c980, 3c980B, and 3c980C server adapters

-   3Com 3cSOHO100-TX OfficeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c450 HomeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c555, 3c556 and 3c556B mini-PCI adapters

-   3Com 3C3SH573BT, 3C575TX, 3CCFE575BT, 3CXFE575BT, 3CCFE575CT,
    3CXFE575CT, 3CCFEM656, 3CCFEM656B, and 3CCFEM656C, 3CXFEM656,
    3CXFEM656B, and 3CXFEM656C CardBus adapters

-   3Com 3c905-TX, 3c905B-TX 3c905C-TX, and 3c920B-EMB embedded adapters

Both the 3C656 family of CardBus cards and the 3C556 family of MiniPCI
cards have a built-in proprietary modem. Neither the xl(4) driver nor
any other driver supports this modem.

The vx(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   3Com 3c590 EtherLink III PCI

-   3Com 3c592 EtherLink III EISA

-   3Com 3c595 Fast EtherLink III PCI in 10 Mbps mode

-   3Com 3c597 Fast EtherLink III EISA in 10 Mbps mode

The txp(4) driver supports the following cards:

-   3Com 3CR990-TX-95

-   3Com 3CR990-TX-97

-   3Com 3cR990B-TXM

-   3Com 3CR990SVR95

-   3Com 3CR990SVR97

-   3Com 3cR990B-SRV

The bge(4) driver provides support for various NICs based on the
Broadcom BCM570x family of Gigabit Ethernet controller chips, including
the following:

-   3Com 3c996-T (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Dell PowerEdge 1750 integrated BCM5704C NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Dell PowerEdge 2550 integrated BCM5700 NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Dell PowerEdge 2650 integrated BCM5703 NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   IBM x235 server integrated BCM5703x NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP ProLiant NC7760 embedded Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP ProLiant NC7770 PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   HP ProLiant NC7781 embedded PCI-X Gigabit NIC (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   Netgear GA302T (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   SysKonnect SK-9D21 (10/100/1000baseTX)

-   SysKonnect SK-9D41 (1000baseSX)

The em(4) driver supports Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the Intel
82540, 82541PI, 82542, 82543, 82544, 82546, 82546EB and 82547 controller
chips:

-   Intel PRO/1000 CT Network Connection (82547)

-   Intel PRO/1000 F Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 Gigabit Server Adapter (82542)

-   Intel PRO/1000 GT Desktop Adapter (82541PI)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Dual Port Server Adapter (82546)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Server Adapter (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MF Server Adapter (LX) (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Desktop Adapter (82540)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Desktop Adapter (82541)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Dual Port Server Adapter (82546)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Quad Port Server Adapter (82546EB)

-   Intel PRO/1000 MT Server Adapter (82545)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Desktop Adapter (82544)

-   Intel PRO/1000 T Server Adapter (82543)

-   Intel PRO/1000 XF Server Adapter (82544)

-   Intel PRO/1000 XT Server Adapter (82544)

The hme(4) driver supports the on-board Ethernet interfaces of many Sun
UltraSPARC workstation and server models. Cards supported by the hme(4)
driver include:

-   Sun PCI SunSwift Adapter

-   Sun SBus SunSwift Adapter ``( hme'' and ``SUNW,hme'')

-   Sun PCI Sun100BaseT Adapter 2.0

-   Sun SBus Sun100BaseT 2.0

-   Sun PCI Quad FastEthernet Controller

-   Sun SBus Quad FastEthernet Controller

The re(4) driver supports RealTek RTL8139C+, RTL8169, RTL8169S and
RTL8110S based Fast Ethernet and Gigabit Ethernet adapters including:

-   Alloy Computer Products EtherGOLD 1439E 10/100 (8139C+)

-   Compaq Evo N1015v Integrated Ethernet (8139C+)

-   Corega CG-LAPCIGT Gigabit Ethernet (8169S)

-   Gigabyte 7N400 Pro2 Integrated Gigabit Ethernet (8110S)

-   PLANEX COMMUNICATIONS Inc. GN-1200TC (8169S)

-   Xterasys XN-152 10/100/1000 NIC (8169)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.3 FDDI Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.4 ATM Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.5 Wireless Network Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.6 Miscellaneous Networks

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.7 ISDN Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.8 Serial Interfaces

``PC standard'' 8250, 16450, and 16550-based serial ports ( sio(4)
driver)

PCI-Based multi-port serial boards ( puc(4) driver)

-   Diva Serial (GSP) Multiport UART (development branch only)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.9 Audio Devices

The snd_ess(4) driver supports the following soundcards:

-   Ensoniq ESS ISA PnP/non-PnP

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.10 Camera and Video Capture Devices

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.11 USB Devices

The ohci(4) driver supports all OHCI v1.0 compliant controllers
including:

-   AcerLabs M5237 (Aladdin-V)

-   AMD-756

-   OPTi 82C861 (FireLink)

-   NEC uPD 9210

-   CMD Tech 670 (USB0670)

-   CMD Tech 673 (USB0673)

-   NVIDIA nForce3

The uhci(4) driver supports all UHCI v1.1 compliant controllers
including:

-   Intel 82371AB/EB (PIIX4)

-   Intel 82371SB (PIIX3)

-   VIA 83C572

USB 2.0 controllers using the EHCI interface ( ehci(4) driver)

The umct(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Magic Control Technology USB-232

-   Sitecom USB-232

-   D-Link DU-H3SP USB BAY Hub

-   Belkin F5U109

-   Belkin F5U409

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.12 IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Devices

The fwohci(4) driver provides support for PCI/CardBus firewire interface
cards. The driver supports the following IEEE 1394 OHCI chipsets:

-   Adaptec AHA-894x/AIC-5800

-   Apple Pangea

-   Apple UniNorth

-   Intel 82372FB

-   Lucent FW322/323

-   NEC uPD72861

-   NEC uPD72870

-   NEC uPD72871/2

-   NEC uPD72873

-   NEC uPD72874

-   National Semiconductor CS4210

-   Ricoh R5C551

-   Ricoh R5C552

-   Sony CX3022

-   Sony i.LINK (CXD1947)

-   Sony i.LINK (CXD3222)

-   Texas Instruments PCI4410A

-   Texas Instruments PCI4450

-   Texas Instruments PCI4451

-   Texas Instruments TSB12LV22

-   Texas Instruments TSB12LV23

-   Texas Instruments TSB12LV26

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AA22

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AB21/A/AI/A-EP

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AB22/A

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AB23

-   Texas Instruments TSB82AA2

-   VIA Fire II (VT6306)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.13 Bluetooth Devices

The ng_ubt(4) driver supports all Bluetooth USB devices that conform
with the Bluetooth specification v1.1, including:

-   3Com 3CREB96

-   AIPTEK BR0R02

-   EPoX BT-DG02

-   Mitsumi Bluetooth USB adapter

-   MSI MS-6967

-   TDK Bluetooth USB adapter

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.14 Cryptographic Accelerators

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.15 Miscellaneous

VGA-compatible video cards ( vga(4) driver)

  Note: Information regarding specific video cards and compatibility
  with XFree86 can be found at http://www.xfree86.org/.

Keyboards including:

-   PS/2 keyboards ( atkbd(4) driver)

Pointing devices including:

-   PS/2 mice and compatible devices, including many laptop pointing
    devices ( psm(4) driver)

-   Serial mice and compatible devices

  Note: moused(8) has more information on using pointing devices with
  FreeBSD. Information on using pointing devices with XFree86 can be
  found at http://www.xfree86.org/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
