[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

FreeBSD Release Engineering Team

Links:
FreeBSD 13.0-RELEASE schedule URL:
https://www.freebsd.org/releases/13.0R/schedule/
FreeBSD 13.0-RELEASE announcement URL:
https://www.freebsd.org/releases/13.0R/announce/
FreeBSD releases URL:
https://download.freebsd.org/ftp/releases/ISO-IMAGES/
FreeBSD development snapshots URL:
https://download.freebsd.org/ftp/snapshots/ISO-IMAGES/

Contact: FreeBSD Release Engineering Team, <re@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Release Engineering Team is responsible for setting and
publishing release schedules for official project releases of FreeBSD,
announcing code freezes and maintaining the respective branches, among
other things.

During the second quarter of 2021, the Release Engineering Team
completed work on the 13.0-RELEASE cycle, the first release from the
stable/13 branch. During the release cycle, one additional BETA build
and two additional RC builds were added to the schedule, however the
release cycle went smoothly, overall.

Additionally throughout the quarter, several development snapshots
builds were released for the main, stable/13, and stable/12 branches.
Development snapshot builds for stable/11 will no longer be available.

Thank you to all that have helped test the 13.0 builds up until this
point and have reported issues. As always, we strive for quality over
quantity.

Sponsor: Rubicon Communications, LLC ("Netgate") Sponsor: The FreeBSD
Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: July 24, 2021 by Daniel Ebdrup Jensen

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
