[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 13.2-RELEASE Errata

Abstract

This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 13.2-RELEASE, containing
significant information discovered after the release or too late in the
release cycle to be otherwise included in the release documentation.
This information includes security advisories, as well as news relating
to the software or documentation that could affect its operation or
usability. An up-to-date version of this document should always be
consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

This errata document for FreeBSD 13.2-RELEASE will be maintained until
the release of FreeBSD 13.3-RELEASE.

Table of Contents

-   Introduction

-   Security Advisories

-   Errata Notices

-   Open Issues

-   Late-Breaking News

Introduction

This errata document contains "late-breaking news" about FreeBSD
13.2-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the "current errata" for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at https://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 13-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
https://www.FreeBSD.org/security/.

Security Advisories

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Advisory                     Date                  Topic
  ---------------------------- --------------------- ---------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Errata Notices

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Errata                       Date                  Topic
  ---------------------------- --------------------- ---------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Open Issues

No open issues.

Late-Breaking News

No late-breaking news.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: July 9, 2023 by Graham Perrin

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
