[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

KDE on FreeBSD

Links:
KDE FreeBSD URL: https://freebsd.kde.org/
KDE Community FreeBSD URL: https://community.kde.org/FreeBSD

Contact: Adriaan de Groot <kde@FreeBSD.org>

The KDE on FreeBSD project packages the software from the KDE Community,
along with dependencies and related software, for the FreeBSD ports
tree. The software includes a full desktop environment called KDE Plasma
(for both X11 and Wayland) and hundreds of applications that can be used
on any FreeBSD machine.

The KDE team (kde@) is part of desktop@ and x11@, building the software
stack to make FreeBSD beautiful and usable as a daily-driver
graphics-based desktop machine. The notes below describe mostly ports
for KDE, but also include items that are important for the entire
desktop stack.

Qt6 Landed

The big news in the KDE ports is not directly KDE-related. Qt6 has
landed, which prepares us for the next generation of Qt-based
applications.

It is now possible to have USES=qt:6 to select the new Qt version. Some
ports have been flavorized to make use of the new version.

KDE itself is not affected: the upstream work on KDE Frameworks for Qt6
is not yet completed. Most of the KDE Frameworks will compile with Qt6,
but that is not important for FreeBSD ports yet. With devel/qt6 you get
Qt 6.4.0, released at the end of the quarter.

KDE Stack

KDE Gear releases happen every quarter, KDE Plasma updates once a month,
and KDE Frameworks have a new release every month as well. These (large)
updates land shortly after their upstream release and are not listed
separately.

-   KDE Frameworks 5 is now at version 5.98 (latest monthly release from
    September 2022).

-   KDE Gear is now version 22.08.1 (update for September 2022).

-   KDE Plasma is now version 5.24.6 (update for July 2022).

Note that KDE Plasma 5.25 has been released upstream, but is waiting on
fixes before it can land in the ports tree (for example, this
KActivityManager bug in KDE’s bug-tracker).

Related Ports

-   accessibility/qt5-speech now supports multiple backends, as well as
    no-backends, for speech synthesis.

-   devel/cmake was reorganized, so that devel/cmake is now a metaport
    that installs devel/cmake-core and the rest of the CMake suite.
    (Thanks to diizzy@) The CMake ports were also updated to version
    3.24, with attendant changes in ports all over the tree.

-   net/qt5-network has improved compatibility with libressl.

-   x11/plasma-wayland-protocols was updated in advance of KDE Plasma
    Desktop updates in the next quarter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: October 18, 2022 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
