[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 4.4-RELEASE i386 Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 4.4-RELEASE on the
i386 hardware platform. It describes new features of FreeBSD that have
been added (or changed) since 4.3-RELEASE.

This distribution of FreeBSD 4.4-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/ or any of its
mirrors. More information on obtaining this (or other) release
distributions of FreeBSD can be found in the ``Obtaining FreeBSD''
appendix to the FreeBSD Handbook.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 What's New

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/common/new.sgml,v
1.22.2.86.2.1 2001/09/14 19:35:01 bmah Exp $

This section describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 4.3-RELEASE.

Many additional changes were made to FreeBSD that are not listed here
for lack of space. For example, documentation was corrected and
improved, minor bugs were fixed, insecure coding practices were audited
and corrected, and source code was cleaned up.

The release notes items are organized into three different sections.
Section 2.1 lists recent changes to the FreeBSD kernel. Security fixes,
including those pertaining to security advisories, are listed in Section
2.2. Finally, Section 2.3 covers changes to FreeBSD userland
applications included in the base system.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Kernel Changes

The O_DIRECT flag has been added to open(2) and fcntl(2). Specifying
this flag for open files will attempt to minimize the cache effects of
reading and writing.

An orm(4) device has been added to claim the option ROMs in the ISA
memory I/O space, to prevent other drivers from mistakenly assigning
addresses that conflict with these ROMs.

The out-of-swap process termination code now begins killing processes
earlier to avoid deadlocks; it now also takes into account the swap
space used by processes when computing the process sizes.

Network device cloning has been implemented, and the gif(4) device has
been modified to take advantage of it. Thus, instead of specifying how
many gif(4) interfaces are available in kernel configuration files,
ifconfig(8)'s create option should be used when another device instance
is desired.

Two new ddb(4) commands, hwatch and dhwatch, have been introduced.
Analogous to watch and dwatch, they install hardware watchpoints (as
opposed to software watchpoints) if supported by the architecture.

A nmdm(4) null-modem terminal driver has been added.

The stl(4) driver now supports the PCI and ISA EasyIO multi-port serial
cards from Stallion Technologies based on the Signetics SC26C194/8
Intelligent Quad/Octal UART.

The maxusers kernel configuration parameter is now a boot-time tunable
variable. The kernel parameters derived from maxusers are now also
tunables and can be overridden at boot-time. The hz parameter is also
now a tunable.

The FreeBSD boot loader now contains a workaround to support CDROM
booting on certain IBM BIOSs that expect the first sector of the
emulated floppy to contain a valid MS-DOS BPB that they can modify.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.1 Processor/Motherboard Support

Detection for new processors, such as the Transmeta Crusoe, and
Transmeta Crusoe with LongRun, has been added.

Support for Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE) has been introduced. The
CPU_ENABLE_SSE kernel option controls whether support is compiled into
the kernel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.2 Network Interface Support

The fxp(4) driver now requires a device miibus entry in the kernel
configuration file.

The wx(4) driver now supports the Intel PRO1000-F and PRO1000-T
(10/100/1000) adapters.

The an(4) driver now supports the Cisco Aironet 350 series of adaptors
and has received a few bug fixes; promiscuous mode now works, and it can
be configured before being brought up.

The xl(4) driver now supports reception of VLAN tagged frames (on the
``Cyclone'' or newer chipsets).

The ti(4) driver correctly masks VLAN tags.

Added the nge(4) driver, which supports PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapters
based on the National Semiconductor DP83820 and DP83821 Gigabit Ethernet
controller chips, including the D-Link DGE-500T, SMC EZ Card 1000
(SMC9462TX), Asante FriendlyNet GigaNIC 1000TA and 1000TPC and Addtron
AEG320T. This driver supports transmit and receive checksum offloading.

The lge(4) driver has been added to support the Level 1 LXT1001
NetCellerator Gigabit Ethernet controller chip. This device is used on
some fiber optic GigE cards from SMC, D-Link and Addtron. Jumbograms and
TCP/IP checksum offload on receive are supported, although hardware VLAN
filtering is not.

The tx(4) driver now supports the fiber-optic SMC 9432FTX NICs.

The ed(4) driver now has support for D-Link DL10022 chips, necessary for
the NetGear FA-410TX and other cards. As a result, device miibus is
required in kernel configurations using the ed(4) driver.

The txp(4) driver has been added to support NICs based on the 3Com 3XP
Typhoon/Sidewinder (3CR990) chipset.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.3 Network Protocols

TCP now has RFC 1323 extensions enabled by default in rc.conf(5).

RFC 1323 and RFC 1644 TCP extensions are now disabled for a connection
in progress if no response has been received by the third SYN segment
sent. This behavior tries to work around (very old) terminal servers
with buggy VJ header compression implementations.

The TCP_RESTRICT_RST kernel option has been removed. Similar
functionality can be achieved with the net.inet.tcp.blackhole sysctl
variable.

The TCP implementation no longer requires the allocation of a TCP
template structure for each connection; this should reduce the buffer
usage on large systems handling many connections.

A new sysctl net.inet.ip.check_interface, which is off by default,
causes IP to verify that an incoming packet arrives on an interface that
has an address matching the packet's destination address.

A new options RANDOM_IP_ID kernel option causes the ID field of IP
packets to be randomized. This closes a minor information leak which
allows a remote observer to determine the rate at which the machine is
generating packets, since the default behavior is to increment a counter
for each packet sent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.4 Disks and Storage

The asr(4) driver now supports the Adaptec 2000S and 2005S Zero-Channel
RAID controllers.

The aac(4) driver now supports the Adaptec SCSI RAID 5400S controller.

The ata(4) driver again has write-caching enabled by default.

The wd(4) compatibility devices were removed from the ata(4) driver.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.5 Filesystems

smbfs (CIFS) support in kernel has been added. The corresponding
userland filesystem mount utility can be found in the net/smbfs port in
the FreeBSD Ports Collection.

A simple hash-based lookup optimization for large directories called
dirhash has been added. Conditional on the UFS_DIRHASH kernel option, it
improves the speed of operations on very large directories at the
expense of some memory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.6 PCCARD Support

On many modern hosts, PCCARD devices can be configured to route their
interrupts via either the ISA or PCI interrupt paths. The pcic(4) driver
has been updated to support both interrupt paths (formerly, only routing
via ISA was supported). In most cases, configuration of PCMCIA devices
in laptops is simpler and more flexible. In addition, various Cardbus
bridge PCI cards (such as those used by Orinoco PCI NICs) are now
supported. Some hosts may experience problems, such as hangs or panics,
with PCI interrupt routing; they can frequently be made to work by
forcing the older-style ISA interrupt routing. The following lines,
placed in /boot/loader.conf, may fix the problem:

        hw.pcic.intr_path="1"
        hw.pcic.irq="0"

When installing FreeBSD on such a system, typing the following lines to
the boot loader may be helpful in starting up FreeBSD for the first
time:

        ok set hw.pcic.intr_path="1"
        ok set hw.pcic.irq="0"

PCCARD ejection can sometimes result in a hang; a workaround for these
cases is to perform a:

        # pccardc power 0 slot

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.7 Multimedia Support

A driver for the Advance Logic ALS4000 has been added.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.8 Contributed Software

IPFilter has been updated to 3.4.20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.8.1 isdn4bsd

isdn4bsd has been updated to version 1.0.1. As a result of this update,
users of the i4bisppp(4) (kernel PPP over ISDN) driver must now use
ispppcontrol(8) instead of spppcontrol(8) to configure and control these
network interfaces.

The ihfc(4) driver for supporting Cologne Chip Designs HFC devices under
isdn4bsd has been added.

The itjc(4) driver for supporting NETjet-S / Teles PCI-TJ devices under
isdn4bsd has been added.

Experimental support for the Eicon.Diehl DIVA 2.0 and 2.02 ISA PnP ISDN
cards has been added to the isic(4) isdn4bsd driver.

Active CAPI-based ISDN cards manufacured by AVM are now supported using
the i4bcapi(4) and the iavc(4) driver. The supported cards are the AVM
B1 PCI and AVM B1 ISA Basic Rate cards and the AVM T1 Primary Rate
cards.

A new maxconnecttime keyword is now accepted in isdnd.rc(5) files to
limit the time a connection may remain open.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.8.2 KAME

The IPv6 stack is now based on a snapshot based on the KAME Project's
IPv6 snapshot as of 28 May, 2001. Most of the items listed in this
section are a result of this import. Section 2.3.1.2 lists userland
updates to the KAME IPv6 stack.

gif(4) is now based on RFC 2893, rather than RFC 1933. The IFF_LINK2
interface flag can be used to control ingress filtering.

IPSec has received some enhancements, including the ability to use the
Rijndael and SHA2 algorithms. IPSec RC5 support has been removed due to
patent issues.

stf(4) now conforms to RFC 3056; the IFF_LINK2 interface flag can be
used to control ingress filtering.

IPv6 has better checking of illegal addresses (such as loopback
addresses) on physical networks.

The IPV6_V6ONLY socket option is now completely supported. The kernel's
default behavior with respect to this option is controlled by the
net.inet6.ip6.v6only sysctl variable.

RFC 3041 (Privacy Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration) is
now supported. It can be enabled via the net.inet6.ip6.use_tempaddr
sysctl variable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Security-Related Changes

The security fix mentioned in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:39, which
governs initial sequence number generation for TCP connections, has
raised some possible compatibility issues. To mitigate this effect, the
fix can now be enabled or disabled using the
net.inet.tcp.tcp_seq_genscheme sysctl variable.

A vulnerability in the fts(3) routines (used by applications for
recursively traversing a filesystem) could allow a program to operate on
files outside the intended directory hierarchy. This bug has been fixed
(see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:40).

portmap(8) is now turned off by default, although it will be started
automatically on machines that enable NFS serving, NIS services, or
amd(8) through rc.conf(5).

A flaw allowed some signal handlers to remain in effect in a child
process after being exec-ed from its parent. This allowed an attacker to
execute arbitrary code in the context of a setuid binary. This flaw has
been corrected (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:42).

A remote buffer overflow in tcpdump(1) has been fixed (see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:48).

A remote buffer overflow in telnetd(8) has been fixed (see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:49).

The new net.inet.ip.maxfragpackets and net.inet.ip6.maxfragpackets
sysctl variables limit the amount of memory that can be consumed by IPv4
and IPv6 packet fragments, which defends against some denial of service
attacks (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:52).

The number of ``security profiles'' available in sysinstall(8) for new
installations has been reduced to two.

All services in inetd.conf are now disabled by default for new
installations. sysinstall(8) gives the option of enabling or disabling
inetd(8) on new installations, as well as editing inetd.conf.

A flaw in the implementation of the ipfw(8) me rules on point-to-point
links has been corrected. Formerly, me filter rules would match the
remote IP address of a point-to-point interface in addition to the
intended local IP address (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:53).

A vulnerability in procfs(5), which could allow a process to read
sensitive information from another process's memory space, has been
closed (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:55).

The PARANOID hostname checking in tcp_wrappers now works as advertised
(see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:56).

A local root exploit in sendmail(8) has been closed (see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:57).

A remote root vulnerability in lpd(8) has been closed (see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:58).

A race condition in rmuser(8) that briefly exposed a world-readable
/etc/master.passwd has been fixed (see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-01:59).

All non-root-owned binaries in standard system paths now have the schg
flag set to prevent exploit vectors when run by cron(8), by root, or by
a user other then the one owning the binary. In addition, uustat(1) is
now run via /etc/periodic/daily/410.status-uucp as uucp, not root.

A security hole in the form of a buffer overflow in the semop(2) system
call has been closed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Userland Changes

ip6fw(8) now has the ability to use a preprocessor and use the -q
(quiet) flag when reading from a file.

ping(8) now supports a -m option to set the TTL of outgoing packets.

ln(1) now takes a -h flag to avoid following a target that is a link,
with a -n flag for compatibility with other implementations.

find(1) now has the -anewer, -cnewer, -mnewer, -okdir, and
-newer[acm][acmt] primaries for comparisons of file timestamps.

The performance of the ELF dynamic linker has been improved.

ifconfig(8) can now accept addresses in slash/CIDR notation.

c89(1) has been converted from a shell script to a binary executable,
fixing some minor bugs.

vidcontrol(1) now supports a -p option to take a snapshot of a
syscons(4) video buffer. These snapshots can be manipulated by the
graphics/scr2png utility in the Ports Collection.

vidcontrol(1) now allows the user to omit the font size specification
when loading a font, and has some better error-handling.

telnet(1) now supports a -u flag to allow connections to UNIX-domain
(AF_UNIX) sockets.

newfs(8) now takes a -U option to enable softupdates on a new
filesystem.

libcrypt now has support for Blowfish password hashing.

Ukrainian language support has been added to the FreeBSD console.

savecore(8) now works correctly on machines with 2 GB or more of RAM.

The syntax of inetd(8)'s support for faithd(8) is now compatible with
that of other BSDs.

The ident protocol support in inetd(8) has been cleaned up and updated.

inetd(8) now has the ability to manage UNIX-domain sockets.

The resolver(3) in FreeBSD now implements EDNS0 support, which will be
necessary when working with IPv6 transport-ready resolvers/DNS servers.

df(1) now takes a -l option to only display information about
locally-mounted filesystems.

whois(1) now directs queries for IP addresses to ARIN. If a query to
ARIN references APNIC or RIPE, the appropriate server will also be
queried, provided that the -Q option is not specified.

The -T option to dump(8) no longer swallows an extra argument.

dump(8) has a new -D option, allowing the path to the /etc/dumpdates
file to be changed.

libfetch now has support for a HTTP_USER_AGENT environment variable.

The getprogname(3) and setprogname(3) library functions have been added
to manipulate the name of the current program. They are used by
error-reporting routines to produce consistent output.

xargs(1) now supports a -J replstr option that allows the user to tell
xargs(1) to insert the data read from standard input at a specific point
in the command line arguments, rather than at the end.

ifconfig(8) now has support for setting parameters for IEEE 802.11
wireless network devices. wi(4) and an(4) devices are supported.

ifconfig(8) no longer displays the list of supported media by default.
Instead it displays it when the -m option is given.

lpd(8) now takes two new options: -c will log all connection errors to
syslogd(8), while -W will allow connections from non-reserved ports.

lpc(8) has been improved; lpc clean is now somewhat safer, and a new
lpc tclean command has been added to check to see what files would be
removed by lpc clean.

du(1) now takes a -I command-line flag to ignore/skip files and
subdirectories matching a specified shell-glob mask.

growfs(8), a utility for growing FFS filesystems, has been added.
ffsinfo(8), a utility for dump all the meta-information of an existing
filesystem, has also been added.

mail(1) now takes a -E flag to avoid sending messages with empty bodies.

vidcontrol(1) now supports a -C option to clear the history buffer for a
given tty, as well as a -h option to set the size of the history buffer.

last(1) now implements a -d option that provides a ``snapshot'' of who
was logged in at a particular date and time.

libcrypt and libdescrypt have been unified to provide a configurable
password authentication hash library. Both the md5 and des hash methods
are provided unless the des hash is specifically compiled out.

install(1) has a number of new features, including the -b and -B options
for backing up existing target files and the -S option for ``safe''
(atomic copy) operation. The -c (copy) flag is now the default, and the
-D (debugging) flag has been withdrawn. install(1) now issues a warning
if -d (create directories) and -C (copy changed files only) are used
together.

The FreeBSD Makefile infrastructure now supports the WARNS directive
from NetBSD. This directive controls the addition of compiler warning
flags to CFLAGS in a relatively compiler-neutral manner.

A new fsck_msdosfs(8) utility has been added to check the consistency of
MS-DOS filesystems.

The kldconfig(8) utility has been added to make it easier to manipulate
the kernel module search path.

moused(8) now takes a -a option to control mouse acceleration.

The tcpmssfixup ppp(8) option now adjusts the maximum receive segment
size of incoming TCP SYN segments as well as outgoing TCP SYN segments.

sysctl(8) now supports a -N option to print out variable names only.

sysctl(8) has replaced the -A and -X options with -ao and -ax
respectively; the former options are now deprecated. The -w flag is
deprecated as well; it is not needed to determine the user's intentions.

cdcontrol(1) now supports next and prev commands to skip forwards or
backwards a specified number of tracks while playing an audio CD.

col(1) now takes a -p flag to force unknown control sequences to be
passed through unchanged.

tmpnam(3) will now use the TMPDIR environment variable, if set, to
specify the location of temporary files.

rc(8) now deletes all non-directory files in /var/run and
/var/spool/lock at boot time.

fmtcheck(3), a function for checking consistency of format string
arguments, has been added.

apmd(8) now has the ability to monitor battery levels and execute
commands based on percentage or minutes of battery life remaining via
the apm_battery configuration directive. See the commented-out examples
in /etc/apmd.conf for the syntax.

pppd(8) (the control program for kernel-level PPP) is now installed mode
4550 and root:dialer, rather than mode 4555 (in other words, it is no
longer world-executable). Users of pppd(8) may need to change their
group settings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1 Contributed Software

BIND is now built with the NOADDITIONAL flag, which causes named(8) to
operate in a more consistent fashion for certain common
misconfigurations.

BIND has been updated to 8.2.4-REL.

Binutils have been upgraded to 2.11.2.

bzip2 1.0.1 has been imported; this brings the bzip2(1) program and the
libbz2 library to the base system.

The ee(1) Easy Editor has been updated to 1.4.2.

file has been updated to 3.36.

gcc(1) now supports the environment variable GCC_OPTIONS, which can hold
a set of default options for GCC.

GNATS has been updated to 3.113.

groff and its related utilities have been updated to FSF version 1.17.2.
This import brings in a new mdoc(7) macro package (sometimes referred to
as mdocNG), which removes many of the limitations of its predecessor.

libpcap has been updated to 0.6.2.

OpenSSL has been upgraded to 0.9.6a.

sendmail and associated utilities have been upgraded to version 8.11.6.
See /usr/src/contrib/sendmail/RELEASE_NOTES for more information.

traceroute(8) now takes its default maximum TTL value from the
net.inet.ip.ttl sysctl variable.

tcpdump has been updated to 3.6.3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1.1 CVSup

CVSup, a frequently used utility in the FreeBSD Ports Collection, was
formerly installable using several ports and packages. The net/cvsup-bin
and net/cvsupd-bin ports/packages are no longer necessary or available;
the net/cvsup port should be used instead.

CVSup has been updated to 16.1_3, which is available in the FreeBSD
Ports Collection as net/cvsup. This update fixes a long-standing (but
only recently encountered) bug which affects the timestamps on all files
after Sun Sep 9 01:46:40 UTC 2001 (1,000,000,000 seconds after the UNIX
epoch).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1.2 KAME

The IPv6 stack is now based on a snapshot based on the KAME Project's
IPv6 snapshot as of 28 May, 2001. Most of the items listed in this
section are a result of this import. Section 2.1.8.2 lists kernel
updates to the KAME IPv6 stack.

faithd(8) now supports a configuration file for access control.

ifconfig(8) can now perform the functions of gifconfig(8).

ifconfig(8) can now perform the functions of prefix(8). prefix(8) is now
a shell script for partial backwards compatibility.

ndp(8) now implements garbage collection for stale NDP entries, as
described in RFC 2461 (Neighbor Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6)).

pim6dd(8) and pim6sd(8) have been removed due to restrictive licensing
conditions. These programs are available in the ports collection as
net/pim6dd and net/pim6sd.

route6d(8) now supports an -n flag to avoid updating the kernel
forwarding table.

The -R (router renumbering) option to rtadvd(8) is currently ignored.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.2 Ports/Packages Collection

pkg_version(1) now takes a -s flag to limit its operation to
ports/packages matching a given string.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

If you're upgrading from a previous release of FreeBSD, most likely it's
4.X and there may be some issues affecting you, depending of course on
your chosen method of upgrading. There are two popular ways of upgrading
FreeBSD distributions:

-   Using sources, via /usr/src

-   Using the binary upgrade option of sysinstall(8).

Please read the INSTALL.TXT file for more information, preferably before
beginning an upgrade. If you are upgrading from source, please be sure
to read /usr/src/UPDATING as well.

Finally, if you want to use one of various means to track the -STABLE or
-CURRENT branches of FreeBSD, please be sure to consult the ``-CURRENT
vs. -STABLE'' section of the FreeBSD Handbook.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 4-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
