[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

FreeBSD Project Administration and Management

Introduction

This page lists teams, groups and individuals within the FreeBSD project
with designated project roles and areas of responsibility, along with
brief descriptions and contact information.

-   Project Management

    -   Core Team

    -   Documentation Engineering Team

    -   Ports Management Team

    -   Ports Security Team

    -   Packages Management Team

-   Release Engineering

    -   Primary Release Engineering Team

-   Teams

    -   Donations Team

    -   Security Team

    -   Vendor Relations

-   Secretaries

    -   Core Team Secretary

    -   Documentation Engineering Team Secretary

    -   Ports Management Team Secretary

-   Internal Administration

    -   Accounts Team

    -   Backup Administrators

    -   Bugmeisters

    -   Cluster Administrators

    -   DNS Administrators

    -   Forum Administrators

    -   Git Administrators

    -   GitHub Repository Mirror

    -   Jenkins Continuous Integration Testing Administrators

    -   FTP/WWW Mirror Site Coordinators

    -   Phabricator Code Review Administration

    -   Postmaster Team

    -   Subversion Administrators

    -   Webmaster Team

    -   Wiki Admin Team

------------------------------------------------------------------------

FreeBSD Core Team <core@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Core Team constitutes the project’s "Board of Directors",
responsible for deciding the project’s overall goals and direction as
well as managing specific areas of the FreeBSD project landscape. The
Core Team is elected by the active developers in the project.

-   Baptiste Daroussin <bapt@FreeBSD.org> (Security Team Liaison)

-   Benedict Reuschling <bcr@FreeBSD.org> (Foundation Liaison)

-   Ed Maste <emaste@FreeBSD.org> (Release Engineering Team Liaison)

-   Greg Lehey <grog@FreeBSD.org>

-   John Baldwin <jhb@FreeBSD.org> (CI Team Liaison)

-   Li-Wen Hsu <lwhsu@FreeBSD.org> (Doceng Team Liaison)

-   Emmanuel Vadot <manu@FreeBSD.org> (Portmgr Team Liaison)

-   Tobias C. Berner <tcberner@FreeBSD.org> (Clusteradm Liaison)

-   Mateusz Piotrowski <0mp@FreeBSD.org> (Bugmeister Team Liaison)

FreeBSD Documentation Engineering Team <doceng@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Documentation Engineering Team is responsible for defining
and following up documentation goals for the committers in the
Documentation project. The doceng team charter describes the duties and
responsibilities of the Documentation Engineering Team in greater
detail.

-   Glen Barber <gjb@FreeBSD.org>

-   Sergio Carlavilla Delgado <carlavilla@FreeBSD.org>

-   Marc Fonvieille <blackend@FreeBSD.org>

-   Danilo G. Baio <dbaio@FreeBSD.org>

-   Benedict Reuschling <bcr@FreeBSD.org>

-   Hiroki Sato <hrs@FreeBSD.org>

-   Fernando Apesteguia <fernape@FreeBSD.org> (Secretary)

FreeBSD Ports Management Team <portmgr@FreeBSD.org>

The primary responsibility of the FreeBSD Ports Management Team is to
ensure that the FreeBSD Ports Developer community provides a ports
collection that is functional, stable, up-to-date and full-featured. Its
secondary responsibility is to coordinate among the committers and
developers who work on it. The portmgr team charter describes the duties
and responsibilities of the Ports Management Team in greater detail.

-   Baptiste Daroussin <bapt@FreeBSD.org>

-   Muhammad Moinur Rahman <bofh@FreeBSD.org>

-   Mathieu Arnold <mat@FreeBSD.org> (Cluster Administration Team
    Liaison)

-   Luca Pizzamiglio <pizzamig@FreeBSD.org>

-   René Ladan <rene@FreeBSD.org> (Secretary)

-   Tobias C. Berner <tcberner@FreeBSD.org>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

FreeBSD Ports Security Team <ports-secteam@FreeBSD.org>

The primary responsibility of the FreeBSD Port Security Team is to
provide rapid response to security incidents that affects the FreeBSD
ports collection and protect the FreeBSD user community by keeping the
community informed of bugs, exploits, popular attacks, and other risks.
More details are available on the Wiki page.

-   Dima Panov <fluffy@FreeBSD.org>

-   Jochen Neumeister <joneum@FreeBSD.org>

-   Thomas Zander <riggs@FreeBSD.org>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

FreeBSD Packages Management Team <pkgmgr@FreeBSD.org>

The primary responsibility of the FreeBSD Packages Management Team is to
assure the ports tree remains functional, this includes running test
builds of proposed changes, reverting/fixing broken commits that break
the builds, maintain the automated package building cluster, and make
the resulting packages available for download by FreeBSD users.

-   Antoine Brodin <antoine@FreeBSD.org>

-   Bryan Drewery <bdrewery@FreeBSD.org>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Primary Release Engineering Team <re@FreeBSD.org>

The Primary Release Engineering Team is responsible for setting and
publishing release schedules for official project releases of FreeBSD,
announcing code freezes and maintaining releng/* branches, among other
things. The release engineering team charter describes the duties and
responsibilities of the Primary Release Engineering Team in greater
detail.

-   Glen Barber <gjb@FreeBSD.org> (Lead)

-   Konstantin Belousov <kib@FreeBSD.org>

-   Marc Fonvieille <blackend@FreeBSD.org>

-   Mike Karels <karels@FreeBSD.org>

-   Xin Li <delphij@FreeBSD.org>

-   Colin Percival <cperciva@FreeBSD.org> (Deputy Lead)

Donations Team <donations@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Donations Team is responsible for responding to donations
offers, establishing donation guidelines and procedures, and
coordinating donation offers with the FreeBSD developer community. A
more detailed description of the duties of the Donations Team is
available on the FreeBSD Donations Liaison page.

-   Pietro Cerutti <gahr@FreeBSD.org>

-   Bradley T. Hughes <bhughes@FreeBSD.org>

-   Adriaan de Groot <adridg@FreeBSD.org>

Security Team <secteam@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Security Team (headed by the Security Officer) is
responsible for keeping the community aware of bugs, exploits and
security risks affecting the FreeBSD src and ports trees, and to promote
and distribute information needed to safely run FreeBSD systems.
Furthermore, it is responsible for resolving software bugs affecting the
security of FreeBSD and issuing security advisories. The FreeBSD
Security Officer Charter describes the duties and responsibilities of
the Security Officer in greater detail.

-   Gordon Tetlow <gordon@FreeBSD.org> (Officer)

-   Baptiste Daroussin <bapt@FreeBSD.org> (Core Team Liaison)

-   Xin Li <delphij@FreeBSD.org> (Officer Emeritus, Release Engineering
    Team Liaison)

-   Dag-Erling Smørgrav <des@FreeBSD.org> (Officer Emeritus)

-   Glen Barber <gjb@FreeBSD.org> (Cluster Administrators Team Liaison)

-   Ed Maste <emaste@FreeBSD.org> (Officer Deputy)

-   Mark Johnston <markj@FreeBSD.org>

-   Mariusz Zaborski <oshogbo@FreeBSD.org>

-   Philip Paeps <philip@FreeBSD.org>

Vendor Relations <vendor-relations@FreeBSD.org>

Vendor Relations is responsible for handling email from hardware and
software vendors. Email sent to Vendor Relations is forwarded to the
FreeBSD Core Team in addition to the FreeBSD Foundation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Core Team Secretary <core-secretary@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Core Team Secretary is a non-voting member of the Core Team,
responsible for documenting the work done by core, keeping track of the
core agenda, contacting non-core members on behalf of core, sending mail
to core, and interfacing with the admin team for committer/account
approval. The Core Team Secretary is also responsible for writing and
sending out monthly status reports to the FreeBSD Developer community,
containing a summary of core’s latest decisions and actions.

-   Sergio Carlavilla Delgado <carlavilla@FreeBSD.org>

Documentation Engineering Team Secretary <doceng-secretary@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Documentation Engineering Team Secretary is a non-voting
member of the Documentation Engineering Team, responsible for
documenting the work done by doceng, keeping track of voting procedures,
and to be an interface to the other teams, especially the admin and Core
teams.

-   Fernando Apesteguia <fernape@FreeBSD.org>

Ports Management Team Secretary <portmgr-secretary@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Ports Management Team Secretary is a non-voting member of
the Ports Management Team, responsible for documenting the work done by
portmgr, keeping track of voting procedures, and to be an interface to
the other teams, especially the admin and Core teams. ThePorts
Management Team Secretary is also responsible for writing and sending
out monthly status reports to the FreeBSD Developer community,
containing a summary of portmgr’s latest decisions and actions.

-   René Ladan <rene@FreeBSD.org>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Accounts Team <accounts@>

The Accounts Team is responsible for setting up accounts for new
committers in the project. Requests for new accounts will not be acted
upon without the proper approval from the appropriate entity.

Email sent to the Accounts Team is handled by the Cluster
Administrators.

Backups Administrators <backups@>

The Backups Administrators handle all backups on the FreeBSD cluster.

Email sent to the Backups Team is handled by the Cluster Administrators.

Bugmeisters <bugmeister@FreeBSD.org>

The Bugmeisters are responsible for ensuring that the problem report
software is in working order, that the entries are correctly categorised
and that there are no invalid entries.

-   Eitan Adler <eadler@FreeBSD.org>

-   Marcus von Appen <mva@FreeBSD.org>

-   Gavin Atkinson <gavin@FreeBSD.org>

-   Kubilay Kocak <koobs@FreeBSD.org>

Cluster Administrators <clusteradm@>

The Cluster Administrators are responsible for maintaining the machines
and services that the project relies on for its distributed work and
communication. Issues concerning the project’s infrastructure or setting
up new machines or services should be directed to them. This team is led
by the lead cluster administrator whose duties and responsbilities are
described in the cluster administration charter in greater detail.

-   Allan Jude <allanjude@FreeBSD.org>

-   Baptiste Daroussin <bapt@FreeBSD.org>

-   Danilo G. Baio <dbaio@FreeBSD.org>

-   David Wolfskill <dhw@FreeBSD.org>

-   Glen Barber <gjb@FreeBSD.org>

-   Li-Wen Hsu <lwhsu@FreeBSD.org>

-   Peter Wemm <peter@FreeBSD.org>

-   Philip Paeps <philip@FreeBSD.org>

-   Ryan Steinmetz <zi@FreeBSD.org> (Lead)

Please consider using one of the more specific aliases (e.g. accounts@,
dnsadm@, mirror-admin@,…​) or opening a bug report to report problems
with the cluster infrastructure. Select "Services" and then "Core
Infrastructure".

DNS Administrators <dnsadm@>

The DNS Administrators are responsible for managing DNS and related
services.

Email sent to the DNS Administrators handled by the Cluster
Administrators.

FreeBSD Forum Administrators <forum-admins@FreeBSD.org>

The Forum Administrators maintain the FreeBSD Project’s Internet forum,
located at https://forums.freebsd.org/ and lead the group of moderators
who work to ensure the relevance and quality of the forum’s content.

-   Brad Davis <brd@FreeBSD.org>

-   Daniel Geržo <danger@FreeBSD.org>

-   Ben C. O. Grimm <dutchdaemon@FreeBSD.org>

-   Lars Engels <lme@FreeBSD.org>

Git Administrators <gitadm@>

The FreeBSD Git Administrators are responsible for maintaining the
health of the Git repositories.

Email to the Git Administrators is handled by the Cluster
Administrators.

Please open a bug report to report problems with the Git repositories.
Select "Services" and then "Core Infrastructure".

Repository Automated Mirroring to GitHub Coordinators <github-automation@FreeBSD.org>

The GitHub Automation team oversees the export of FreeBSD source code
repository content to the read-only repository instances on GitHub

-   Kubilay Kocak <koobs@FreeBSD.org>

-   Marcus von Appen <mva@FreeBSD.org>

-   Bartek Rutkowski <robak@FreeBSD.org>

-   Craig Rodrigues <rodrigc@FreeBSD.org>

-   Ulrich Spörlein <uqs@FreeBSD.org>

Jenkins Continuous Integration Testing Administrators <jenkins-admin@FreeBSD.org>

The Jenkins Administrators maintain the Continuous Integration and
testing infrastructure for The FreeBSD Project. This includes
maintaining the Jenkins instance and the jobs that run builds and
execute tests.

-   Baptiste Daroussin <bapt@FreeBSD.org>

-   Brad Davis <brd@FreeBSD.org>

-   Brooks Davis <brooks@FreeBSD.org>

-   Li-Wen Hsu <lwhsu@FreeBSD.org>

-   Steve Wills <swills@FreeBSD.org>

FTP/WWW Mirror Site Coordinators <mirror-admin@>

The FTP/WWW Mirror Site Coordinators coordinate all the FTP/WWW mirror
site administrators to ensure that they are distributing current
versions of the software, that they have the capacity to update
themselves when major updates are in progress, and making it easy for
the general public to find their closest FTP/WWW mirror.

Email to the Mirror Site Coordinators is handled by the Cluster
Administrators.

Please open a bug report to report problems with the mirror
infrastructure. Select "Services" and then "FTP/WWW Sites & Mirrors".

Phabricator Code Review Application Administrators <phabric-admin@FreeBSD.org>

The Phabricator Administrators are responsible for maintaining the
FreeBSD’s instance of the Phabricator on-line code review tool located
at https://reviews.freebsd.org/

-   Allan Jude <allanjude@FreeBSD.org>

-   Muhammad Moinur Rahman <bofh@FreeBSD.org>

-   Eitan Adler <eadler@FreeBSD.org>

-   Ed Maste <emaste@FreeBSD.org>

-   Jonathan T. Looney <jtl@FreeBSD.org>

-   Li-Wen Hsu <lwhsu@FreeBSD.org>

-   Mathieu Arnold <mat@FreeBSD.org>

-   Kurt Jaeger <pi@FreeBSD.org>

For any problems regarding Phabricator, please open a bug report and
select "Services" and then "Code Review".

Postmaster Team <postmaster@FreeBSD.org>

The Postmaster Team is responsible for mail being correctly delivered to
the committers' email address, ensuring that the mailing lists work, and
should take measures against possible disruptions of project mail
services, such as having troll-, spam- and virus-filters.

-   Baptiste Daroussin <bapt@FreeBSD.org>

-   Kirill Ponomarew <krion@FreeBSD.org>

-   Larry Rosenman <ler@FreeBSD.org>

-   Philip Paeps <philip@FreeBSD.org>

-   Kurt Jaeger <pi@FreeBSD.org>

-   Eygene Ryabinkin <rea@FreeBSD.org>

-   Ryan Steinmetz <zi@FreeBSD.org>

Subversion Administrators <svnadm@>

The FreeBSD Subversion Administrators are responsible for maintaining
the health of the Subversion repositories.

Email to the Subversion Administrators is handled by the Cluster
Administrators.

Please open a bug report to report problems with the Subversion
repositories. Select "Services" and then "Core Infrastructure".

Webmaster Team <webmaster@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Webmaster Team is appointed by FreeBSD Documentation
Engineering Team, and responsible for keeping the main FreeBSD web sites
up and running. This means web server configuration, CGI scripts,
fulltext and mailing list search. Anything web related, technical stuff
belongs to the scope of the Webmaster Team, excluding bugs in the
documentation.

Email to the Webmaster Team is currently forwarded to the Documentation
Engineering team with the addition of:

-   Wolfram Schneider <wosch@FreeBSD.org>

Wiki Admin Team <wiki-admin@FreeBSD.org>

The FreeBSD Wiki Team is responsible for keeping the FreeBSD Wiki site
up and running. They also shape the overall design and content
structure.

-   Mark Linimon <linimon@FreeBSD.org>

-   Kubilay Kocak <koobs@FreeBSD.org>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: April 13, 2023 by Glen Barber

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
