[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/amd64 6.3-RELEASE Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008 The
FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/common/new.sgml,v
1.883.2.87.2.7 2008/01/15 02:34:11 hrs Exp $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

IBM, AIX, EtherJet, Netfinity, OS/2, PowerPC, PS/2, S/390, and ThinkPad
are trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in the
United States, other countries, or both.

IEEE, POSIX, and 802 are registered trademarks of Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. in the United States.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “®” symbol.

The release notes for FreeBSD 6.3-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system on the 6.3-STABLE development
line. This document lists applicable security advisories that were
issued since the last release, as well as significant changes to the
FreeBSD kernel and userland. Some brief remarks on upgrading are also
presented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 What's New

2.1 Security Advisories

2.2 Kernel Changes

2.2.1 Boot Loader Changes

2.2.2 Hardware Support

2.2.3 Network Protocols

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

2.2.5 File Systems

2.3 Userland Changes

2.3.1 /etc/rc.d Scripts

2.4 Contributed Software

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

2.7 Documentation

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 6.3-RELEASE on the
AMD64 hardware platform. It describes recently added, changed, or
deleted features of FreeBSD. It also provides some notes on upgrading
from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 6.3-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/ or any of its mirrors. More
information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the “Obtaining FreeBSD” appendix to the FreeBSD
Handbook.

All users are encouraged to consult the release errata before installing
FreeBSD. The errata document is updated with “late-breaking” information
discovered late in the release cycle or after the release. Typically, it
contains information on known bugs, security advisories, and corrections
to documentation. An up-to-date copy of the errata for FreeBSD
6.3-RELEASE can be found on the FreeBSD Web site.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 What's New

This section describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 6.2-RELEASE.

Typical release note items document recent security advisories issued
after 6.2-RELEASE, new drivers or hardware support, new commands or
options, major bug fixes, or contributed software upgrades. They may
also list changes to major ports/packages or release engineering
practices. Clearly the release notes cannot list every single change
made to FreeBSD between releases; this document focuses primarily on
security advisories, user-visible changes, and major architectural
improvements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Security Advisories

Two remote denials of service in BIND (one involving DNSSEC and one
involving recursive DNS queries) have been fixed. For more information,
see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-07:02.bind.

Processing of IPv6 type 0 Routing Headers is now controlled by the
net.inet6.ip6.rthdr0_allowed sysctl variable, which defaults to 0 (off).
For more information, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-07:03.ipv6.

Problems with libarchive(3) and tar(1) handling corrupted tar(5) archive
files have been fixed. More details can be found in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-07:05.libarchive.

A buffer overflow in OpenSSL (fixed incorrectly in a previously security
patch) has been corrected. More details can be found in security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-07:08.openssl.

An flaw that could lead to the disclosure of previously-generated
random(4) data has been corrected. Information regarding this issue can
be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-07:09.random.

Information disclosure issues found in openpty(3) and ptsname(3) have
been corrected. Information regarding this issue can be found in
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-08:01.pty.

A programming error in inet_network(3) Internet address manipulation
function that could lead to overwriting a region of memory with user
defined data has been corrected. Information regarding this issue can be
found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-08:02.libc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Kernel Changes

acpi(4) now has support for the HPET time counter.

Support for Message Signaled Interrupts (MSI) and Extended Message
Signaled Interrupts (MSI-X) has been added to the kernel's PCI support
code.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1 Boot Loader Changes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2 Hardware Support

An acpi_dock(4) driver has been added to provide support for controlling
laptop docking station functions via ACPI.

The coretemp(4) driver has been added to provide temperature readings on
Intel® Core™ processors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.1 Multimedia Support

The snd_envy24(4) driver has been added to support the Envy24 series of
audio chips.

The snd_envy24ht(4) driver has been added to support the VIA Envy24HT
series of audio chips.

The snd_hda(4) driver has been added. It supports devices that conform
to revision 1.0 of the Intel High Definition Audio specification.

The snd_spicds(4) driver has been added to support I2S SPI audio codec
chips.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.2 Network Interface Support

The ath(4) driver has been updated to HAL version 0.9.20.3.

The axe(4) driver now supports altq(4).

The cxgb(4) driver has been added. It provides support for 10 Gigabit
Ethernet adapters based on the Chelsio T3 and T3B chipsets.

The edsc(4) driver, which provides Ethernet discard network interfaces,
has been added.

The em(4) driver has been updated to version 6.7.2 from Intel.

The msk(4) driver has been added. It supports network interfaces using
the Marvell/SysKonnect Yukon II Gigabit Ethernet controller.

The mxge(4) driver, which supports Myricom Myri10GE 10 Gigabit Ethernet
adapters, has been added. For more details, see mxge(4).

The vge(4) driver now supports altq(4).

The 802.11 protocol stack now has support for 900 MHz cards, as well as
quarter- and half-channel support for 802.11a.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.3 Network Protocols

The if_bridge(4) driver now supports RSTP, the Rapid Spanning Tree
Protocol (802.1w).

The lagg(4) driver, ported from OpenBSD and NetBSD, has been added to
support a variety of protocols and algorithms for link aggregation,
failover, and fault tolerance.

A new ng_deflate(4) NetGraph node type has been added. It implements
Deflate PPP compression.

The ng_ppp(4) Netgraph node is now MPSAFE.

A new ng_pred1(4) NetGraph node type has been added to implement
Predictor-1 PPP compression.

A bug which prevented FreeBSD 6.2-RELEASE from running IPv6 correctly
over gif(4) tunnels has been fixed.

The net.link.tap.up_on_open sysctl variable has been added to the tap(4)
driver. If enabled, new tap devices will marked up upon creation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

The mpt(4) driver has been updated to support various new features such
as RAID volume and RAID member state/settings reporting, periodic volume
re-synchronization status reporting, and sysctl variables for volume
re-synchronization rate, volume member write cache status, and volume
transaction queue depth.

The mpt(4) driver now supports SAS HBA (partially), 64-bit PCI, and
large data transfer.

The scsi_sg driver, which emulates a significant subset of the Linux
SCSI SG passthrough device API, has been added. It is intended to allow
programs running under Linux emulation (as well as native FreeBSD
applications) to access the /dev/sg* devices supported by Linux.

The twa(4) driver has been updated to the 3.60.03.006 release on the
3ware Web site. It now supports AMCC's 3ware 9650 series of SATA
controllers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.5 File Systems

The unionfs file system has been re-implemented. This version solves
many crashing and locking issues compared to the previous
implementation. It also adds new “transparent” and “masquerade” modes
for automatically creating files in the upper file system layer of
unions. More information can be found in the mount_unionfs(8) manual
page.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Userland Changes

The camcontrol(8) utility now supports a readcap command to display the
size of devices.

A bug in freebsd-update(8), which caused it not to update SMP kernels
correctly, has been fixed.

The fdisk(8) program now supports a -p flag to print the slice table in
fdisk configuration format.

The freebsd-update(8) utility now supports an upgrade command to perform
binary upgrades between different versions of FreeBSD.

The ftpd(8) utility now has support for RFC2389 (FEAT) and rudimentary
support for RFC2640 (UTF8). The RFC2640 support is optional and can be
enabled using the new -8 flag. More information can be found in the
ftpd(8) manual page.

The ipfwpcap(8) utility has been added; it captures packets on a
divert(4) socket and writes them as pcap(3) (also known as tcpdump(1))
format data to a file or pipe.

The rpc.lockd(8) and rpc.statd(8) programs now accept -p options to
indicate which port they should bind to.

The pw(8) program now supports a -M option to set the permissions of a
user's newly created home directory.

The top(1) program now supports a -j flag to display the jail(8) ID for
each process.

The touch(1) utility now supports a -A flag that allows the access and
modification times of a file be adjusted by a specified value.

The wpa_passphrase(8) utility has been added. It generates a 256-bit
pre-shared WPA key from an ASCII passphrase.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1 /etc/rc.d Scripts

The sendmail script can be instructed not to rebuild the aliases
database if it is missing or older than the aliases file. If desired,
set the new rc.conf option sendmail_rebuild_aliases to "NO" to turn off
that functionality.

The /etc/rc.d/nfslocking script has been deprecated and will be removed
in a future release. It has been replaced by the /etc/rc.d/lockd and
/etc/rc.d/statd scripts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4 Contributed Software

awk has been updated from the 24 April 2005 release to the 1 May 2007
release.

BIND has been updated from 9.3.3 to 9.3.4-p1.

BZIP2 has been updated from 1.0.3 to 1.0.4.

GNU Diffutils has been updated from 2.7 to 2.8.7.

The GNU version of gzip has been replaced with a modified version of
gzip ported from NetBSD.

IPFilter has been updated from 4.1.13 to 4.1.28.

less has been updated from v381 to v416.

ncurses has been updated from 5.2-20020615 to 5.6-20061217. ncurses now
also has wide character support.

netcat has been updated from the version in a 4 February 2005 OpenBSD
snapshot to the version included in OpenBSD 4.1.

GNU Readline library has been updated from 5.0 to 5.2 patch 2.

sendmail has been updated from 8.13.8 to 8.14.2.

The timezone database has been updated from the tzdata2006g release to
the tzdata2007k release.

TrustedBSD OpenBSM has been updated from 1.0 alpha 12 to 1.0.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6 Release Engineering and Integration

The supported version of the GNOME desktop environment (x11/gnome2) has
been updated from 2.16.1 to 2.20.1.

The supported version of the KDE desktop environment (x11/kde3) has been
updated from 3.5.4 to 3.5.7.

The supported version of the Xorg windowing system (x11/xorg) has been
updated from 6.9.0 to 7.3.0.

The default value of X11BASE has been changed from /usr/X11R6 to
/usr/local, the default value of LOCALBASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7 Documentation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

Source upgrades to FreeBSD 6.3-RELEASE are only supported from FreeBSD
5.3-RELEASE or later. Users of older systems wanting to upgrade
6.3-RELEASE will need to update to FreeBSD 5.3 or newer first, then to
FreeBSD 6.3-RELEASE.

  Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should, of course, only be attempted
  after backing up all data and configuration files.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
