FreeBSD/i386 5.0-DP1 Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright Â© 2000, 2001, 2002 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/common/new.sgml,v
1.299 2002/03/13 05:41:41 bmah Exp $

The release notes for FreeBSD 5.0-DP1 contain a summary of the changes
made in the FreeBSD base system since 4.0-RELEASE. Both changes for
kernel and userland are listed, as well as applicable security
advisories that were issued since the last release. Some brief remarks
on upgrading are also presented.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 What's New

2.1 Kernel Changes

2.1.1 Processor/Motherboard Support

2.1.2 Bootloader Changes

2.1.3 Network Interface Support

2.1.4 Network Protocols

2.1.5 Disks and Storage

2.1.6 Filesystems

2.1.7 PCCARD Support

2.1.8 Multimedia Support

2.1.9 Contributed Software

2.2 Security-Related Changes

2.3 Userland Changes

2.3.1 Contributed Software

2.3.2 Ports/Packages Collection

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 5.0-DP1 on the
IA-32 hardware platform. It describes new features of FreeBSD that have
been added (or changed) since 4.0-RELEASE. It also provides some notes
on upgrading from previous versions of FreeBSD.

The snapshot distribution to which these release notes apply represents
a point along the 5-CURRENT development branch between 4.0-RELEASE and
the future 5.0-RELEASE. Some pre-built, binary snapshot distributions
along this branch can be found at
ftp://current.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2 What's New

This section describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 4.0-RELEASE. Typical release note items document new
drivers or hardware support, new commands or options, major bugfixes, or
contributed software upgrades. Security advisories issued after
4.0-RELEASE are also listed. In general, changes described here are
unique to the 5-CURRENT branch unless specifically marked as [MERGED]
features.

Many additional changes were made to FreeBSD that are not listed here
for lack of space. For example, documentation was corrected and
improved, minor bugs were fixed, insecure coding practices were audited
and corrected, and source code was cleaned up.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1 Kernel Changes

The amdpm(4) driver has been added to provide access to the system
monitoring functions of the AMD 756 chipset. [MERGED]

The agp(4) driver for AGP devices has been added. [MERGED]

A new ddb(4) command show pcpu lists some of the per-CPU data.

Two new ddb(4) commands, hwatch and dhwatch, have been introduced.
Analogous to watch and dwatch, they install hardware watchpoints (as
opposed to software watchpoints) if supported by the architecture.
[MERGED]

devfs(5), which allows entries in the /dev directory to be built
automatically and supports more flexible attachment of devices, has been
largely reworked. devfs(5) is now enabled by default and can be disabled
by the NODEVFS kernel option.

The dgm driver has been removed in favor of the digi driver.

A new digi driver has been added to support PCI Xr-based and ISA Xem
Digiboard cards. A new digictl(8) program is (mainly) used to
re-initialize cards that have external port modules attached such as the
PC/Xem.

An eaccess(2) system call has been added, similar to access(2) except
that the former uses effective credentials rather than real credentials.

The ichsmb(4) driver for the Intel 82801AA (ICH) SMBus controller and
compatibles has been added. [MERGED]

Each jail(2) environment can now run under its own securelevel.

The tunable sysctl variables for jail(2) have moved from jail.* to the
security.* hierarchy. Other security-related sysctl variables have moved
from kern.security.* to security.*.

The kern.maxvnodes limit now properly limits the number of vnodes in
use. Previously only vnodes with no cached pages could be freed; this
could allow the number of vnodes to grow without limit on large-memory
machines accessing many small files. A vnlru kernel thread helps to
flush and reuse vnodes. [MERGED]

The kernel message buffer is now accessible by the (machine-independent)
kern.msgbuf sysctl variable; dmesg(8) no longer needs to be SGID kmem.
[MERGED]

The kqueue(2) event notification facility was added to the FreeBSD
kernel. This is a new interface which is able to replace poll(2)/
select(2), offering improved performance, as well as the ability to
report many different types of events. Support for monitoring changes in
sockets, pipes, fifos, and files are present, as well as for signals and
processes. [MERGED]

A new KVA_SPACE kernel option can be used to reconfigure the size of the
kernel virtual address space. [MERGED]

The labpc(4) driver has been removed due to ``bitrot''.

The loader and kernel linker now look for files named linker.hints in
each directory with KLDs for a module name and version to KLD filename
mapping. The new kldxref(8) utility is used to generate these files.

Linux emulation now supports the kernel functionality required by the
emulators/linux_base-7 (RedHat 7.X emulation) port. [MERGED]

Linux emulation now requires options SYSVSEM in the kernel
configuration. [MERGED]

lomac(4), a Low-Watermark Mandatory Access Control security facility,
has been added as a kernel module. It provides a drop-in security
mechanism in addition to the traditional UID-based security facilities,
requiring no additional configuration from the administrator. Work on
this feature was sponsored by DARPA and NAI Labs.

The maxusers kernel configuration parameter is now a boot-time tunable
variable. The kernel parameters derived from maxusers are now also
tunables and can be overridden at boot-time. The hz parameter is also
now a tunable. [MERGED]

Specifying a value of 0 for the maxusers kernel configuration parameter
will now cause an appropriate value to be calculated at boot-time
(between 32 and 384, depending on the amount of memory present). This
value is now the default for all GENERIC kernels. [MERGED]

The kernel configuration parameters MAXTSIZ, DFLDSIZ, MAXDSIZ, DFLSSIZ,
MAXSSIZ, and SGROWSIZ are all loader tunables (kern.maxtsiz,
kern.maxdfldsiz, etc.). [MERGED]

The NCPU, NAPIC, NBUS, and NINTR kernel configuration options, for
configuring SMP kernels, have been removed. NCPU is now set to a maximum
of 16, and the other, aforementioned options are now dynamic. [MERGED]

A nmdm(4) null-modem terminal driver has been added. [MERGED]

The O_DIRECT flag has been added to open(2) and fcntl(2). Specifying
this flag for open files will attempt to minimize the cache effects of
reading and writing. [MERGED]

An orm(4) device has been added to claim the option ROMs in the ISA
memory I/O space, to prevent other drivers from mistakenly assigning
addresses that conflict with these ROMs. [MERGED]

PECOFF (Win32 Execution file format) support has been added.

The pmc driver, which supports the power management controller of the
NEC PC-98NOTE, has been added. [MERGED]

POSIX.1b Shared Memory Objects are now supported. The implementation
uses regular files, but automatically enables the MAP_NOSYNC flag when
they are mmap(2)-ed. [MERGED]

Replaced the PQ_*CACHE options with a single PQ_CACHESIZE option to be
set to the cache size in kilobytes. The old options are still supported
for backwards compatibility. [MERGED]

The puc(4) (PCI ``Universal'' Communications) driver has been added, to
help connect PCI-based serial ports to the sio(4) driver. [MERGED]

The random(4) device has been rewritten to use the Yarrow algorithm. It
harvests entropy from a variety of interrupt sources, including the
console devices, Ethernet and point-to-point network interfaces, and
mass-storage devices. Entropy from the random(4) device is now
periodically saved to files in /var/db/entropy, as well as at shutdown
time. The semantics of /dev/random have changed; it never blocks waiting
for entropy bits but generates a stream of pseudo-random data and now
behaves exactly as /dev/urandom.

A new kernel option, options REGRESSION, enables interfaces and
functionality intended for use during correctness and regression
testing.

The snp(4) device is no longer static and can now be compiled as a
module. [MERGED]

The spic(4) driver, which provides access to the jog dial device on some
Sony laptops, has been added.

The syscons(4) driver now supports keyboard-controlled pasting, by
default bound to Shift-Insert.

Support for USB devices was added to the GENERIC kernel and to the
installation programs to support USB devices out of the box. Note that
SRM does not support USB devices at the moment, so you must still use an
AT keyboard if you are not using a serial console. [MERGED]

The umodem driver for USB modems has been added. Support is provided for
the 3Com 5605 and Metricom Ricochet GS wireless USB modems. [MERGED]

The uscanner(4) driver for basic USB scanner support using SANE has been
added. See the SANE home page for supported scanners. The HP ScanJet
4100C, 5200C and 6300C are known to be working. [MERGED]

The USER_LDT kernel option is now activated by default.

A VESA S3 linear framebuffer driver has been added.

Write combining for crashdumps has been implemented. This feature is
useful when write caching is disabled on both SCSI and IDE disks, where
large memory dumps could take up to an hour to complete. [MERGED]

Extremely large swap areas (>67 GB) no longer panic the system.

The buildkernel target now gets the name of the configuration(s) to
build from the KERNCONF variable, not KERNEL. It is no longer required,
in some cases, for a buildworld to precede a buildkernel. (The
buildworld is still required when upgrading across major releases,
across binutil updates and when config(8) changes version.) [MERGED]

The out-of-swap process termination code now begins killing processes
earlier to avoid deadlocks; it now also takes into account the swap
space used by processes when computing the process sizes. [MERGED]

Linker sets are now self-contained; gensetdefs(8) is unnecessary and has
been removed.

Numerous SMP-friendly changes have been made to the kernel's mbuf
allocator.

Network device cloning has been implemented, and the gif(4) device has
been modified to take advantage of it. Thus, instead of specifying how
many gif(4) interfaces are available in kernel configuration files,
ifconfig(8)'s create option should be used when another device instance
is desired. [MERGED]

It is now possible to hardwire kernel environment variables (such as
tuneables) at compile-time using config(8)'s ENV directive.

Idle zeroing of pages can be enabled with the vm.zeroidle_enable sysctl
variable.

The load addresses of kernels are now exported to the symbol table and
various hard-coded constants have been removed so that utilities such as
ps(1) can work with kernels compiled at different addresses. [MERGED]

Coredumps of large processes (or of a large number of processes) no
longer lock up the machine for long periods of time. [MERGED]

The kernel is now aware of the concept that there are smaller units of
scheduling than a process (but only one thread per process is allowed at
this time).

The kernel now has support for multiple low-level console devices. The
new conscontrol(8) utility helps to manage the different consoles.

The kernel on the installation CDs is now separated from the mfsroot
image. This permits the use of a full kernel when installing from CD on
machines that support CD booting (instead of the stripped-down kernel
used on floppies). [MERGED]

The system load average computation now adds some jitter to the timing
of samples, in order to avoid synchronization with processes that run
periodically. [MERGED]

If a debugging kernel with modules is being built (i.e. using
makeoptions DEBUG=-g), the modules will now be built with debugging
support as well, for completeness. A side effect of this change is that
modules built and installed with debugging kernels will now occupy more
space on disk than they did previously. [MERGED]

The kernel dump device can now be set via the dumpdev loader tunable. As
a result, it is now possible to obtain crash dumps from panics during
the late stages of kernel initialization (before the system enters into
single-user mode). [MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1.1 Processor/Motherboard Support

SMP support has been largely reworked, incorporating code from BSD/OS
5.0. One of the main features of SMPng (``SMP Next Generation'') is to
allow more processes to run in kernel, without the need for spin locks
that can dramatically reduce the efficiency of multiple processors.
Interrupt handlers now have contexts associated with them that allow
them to be blocked, which reduces the need to lock out interrupts.

Support for the 80386 processor has been removed from the GENERIC
kernel, as this code seriously pessimizes performance on other IA32
processors.

The I386_CPU kernel option to support the 80386 processor is now
mutually exclusive with support for other IA32 processors; this should
slightly improve performance on the 80386 due to the elimination of
runtime processor type checks.

Custom kernels that will run on the 80386 can still be built by changing
the cpu options in the kernel configuration file to only include
I386_CPU.

Detection for new processors, such as the FC-PGA2 Pentium III
(Tualatin), Transmeta Crusoe, and Transmeta Crusoe LongRun, has been
added. [MERGED]

Support for Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE) has been introduced. The
CPU_ENABLE_SSE kernel option controls whether support is compiled into
the kernel. [MERGED]

The CPU_ATHLON_SSE_HACK kernel option has been added, which attempts to
enable the SSE feature bit on newer Athlon CPUs if the BIOS has
forgotten to enable it.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1.2 Bootloader Changes

A new cdboot bootstrap utility for CDROMs provides better compatability
with some BIOS implementations that do not completely implement the El
Torito bootable CDROM standard. This boot loader supports ``no
emulation'' mode booting, thus eliminating the need for an emulated
floppy disk image on a bootable CDROM. [MERGED]

The i386 boot loader now has support for a nullconsole console type, for
use on systems with neither a video console nor a serial port. [MERGED]

The loader(8) now has optional support (enabled at compile-time, off by
default) for loading bzip2-compressed kernels and modules. [MERGED]

Support for Intel's Wired for Management 2.0 (PXE) was added to the
FreeBSD boot loader. Due to API differences, the older PXE versions are
not supported. This allow network booting using DHCP. [MERGED]

The FreeBSD boot loader now contains a workaround to support CDROM
booting on certain IBM BIOSs that expect the first sector of the
emulated floppy to contain a valid MS-DOS BPB that they can modify.
[MERGED]

The FreeBSD boot loader now supports a -p flag to force the kernel to
pause after each line of output during the probing phase. [MERGED]

The FreeBSD boot loader is now capable of booting from filesystems with
block sizes larger than 8K. [MERGED]

The kernel and modules have been moved to the directory /boot/kernel, so
they can be easily manipulated together. The boot loader has been
updated to make this change as seamless as possible.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1.3 Network Interface Support

The an(4) driver for Cisco Aironet cards now supports Wired Equivalent
Privacy (WEP) encryption, settable via ancontrol(8). [MERGED]

The an(4) driver now supports the Cisco Aironet 350 series of adaptors.
[MERGED]

The an(4) driver now supports ``monitor'' mode, settable via the -M
option to ancontrol(8). [MERGED]

The an(4) driver now supports Cisco LEAP, as well as the ``Home'' WEP
key. The Linux Aironet utilities are now supported under emulation.
[MERGED]

Generic support for ARCNET token-based networks has been added. [MERGED]

The bge(4) driver has been added to support the Broadcom BCM570x family
of Gigabit Ethernet controllers, including the 3Com 3c996-T, the
SysKonnect SK-9D21 and SK-9D41, and the built-in Gigabit Ethernet NICs
on Dell PowerEdge 2550 servers. Output TCP/IP checksum offload, jumbo
frames and VLAN tag insertion/stripping are supported, as well as
interrupt moderation. [MERGED]

The cm driver has been added to support SMC COM90cx6 ARCNET network
adapters. [MERGED]

The dc(4) driver now supports NICs based on the Xircom 3201 and Conexant
LANfinity RS7112 chips.

The dc(4) driver now has support for VLANs. [MERGED]

The de(4) driver now performs round-robin arbitration between the
transmit and receive units of the 21143, instead of giving priority to
the receive unit. This gives a 10-15% performance improvement in the
forwarding rate under heavy load. [MERGED]

Linksys Fast Ethernet PCCARD cards supported by the ed(4) driver now
require the addition of flag 0x80000 to their config line in
pccard.conf(5). This flag is not optional. These Linksys cards will not
be recognized without it. [MERGED]

A bug in the ed(4) driver that could cause panics with very short
packets and BPF or bridging active has been fixed. [MERGED]

The ed(4) driver now has support for D-Link DL10022 chips, necessary for
the NetGear FA-410TX and other cards. As a result, device miibus is
required in kernel configurations using the ed(4) driver. [MERGED]

The el(4) driver can now be loaded as a module.

The em(4) driver has been added to support NICs based on the Intel
82542, 82543, and 82544 Gigabit Ethernet controller chips. The driver
supports transmit/receive checksum offload and jumbo frames on 82543 and
82544-based adapters. [MERGED]

The faith(4) device is now loadable, unloadable, and clonable. [MERGED]

Support for Fujitsu MB86960A/MB86965A based Ethernet PC-Cards has been
added back in the fe(4) driver. [MERGED]

The fxp(4) driver now requires a device miibus entry in the kernel
configuration file. [MERGED]

The fxp(4) driver now contains a workaround for PCI protocol violations
caused by defects in some systems based on the Intel ICH2/ICH2-M chip.
The workaround is to rewrite the EEPROM on the interface to disable
Dynamic Standby Mode; once the EEPROM is rewritten, the system needs to
be rebooted for the new settings to take effect. [MERGED]

The fxp(4) driver now supports Intel's loadable microcode to implement
receive-side interrupt coalescing and packet bundling, on NICs that
support these features. This support can be activated by the use of the
link0 option to ifconfig(8). [MERGED]

The gx(4) driver has been added to support NICs based on the Intel 82542
and 82543 Gigabit Ethernet controller chips. Both fiber and copper
variants of the cards are supported. Both boards support VLAN
tagging/insertion, and the 82543 additionally supports TCP/IP checksum
offload. [MERGED]

The lge(4) driver has been added to support the Level 1 LXT1001
NetCellerator Gigabit Ethernet controller chip. This device is used on
some fiber optic GigE cards from SMC, D-Link and Addtron. Jumbograms and
TCP/IP checksum offload on receive are supported, although hardware VLAN
filtering is not. [MERGED]

Added the nge(4) driver, which supports PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapters
based on the National Semiconductor DP83820 and DP83821 Gigabit Ethernet
controller chips, including the D-Link DGE-500T, SMC EZ Card 1000
(SMC9462TX), Asante FriendlyNet GigaNIC 1000TA and 1000TPC and Addtron
AEG320T. This driver supports transmit and receive checksum offloading.
[MERGED]

The pcn(4) driver, which supports the AMD PCnet/FAST, PCnet/FAST+,
PCnet/FAST III, PCnet/PRO, PCnet/Home, and HomePNA adapters, has been
added. Although these cards are already supported by the lnc(4) driver,
the pcn(4) driver runs these chips in 32-bit mode and uses the RX
alignment feature to achieve zero-copy receive. This driver is also
machine-independent, so it will work on both the i386 and Alpha
platforms. The lnc(4) driver is still needed to support non-PCI cards.
[MERGED]

The ray(4) driver, which supports the Webgear Aviator wireless network
cards, has been committed. The operation of ray(4) interfaces can be
modified by raycontrol(8). [MERGED]

The sbni driver, for supporting the Granch SBNI12 series of ISA and PCI
point-to-point communications interfaces, has been added. The
sysutils/sbniconfig port in the FreeBSD Ports Collection can be used for
configuring these devices. [MERGED]

Added support for PCI Ethernet adapters based on the SiS 900 and SiS
7016 Fast Ethernet controller chips (for example, as seen on the SiS 635
and 735 motherboard chipsets), as well as the National Semiconductor
DP83815 chipset (including the NetGear FA311-TX and FA312-TX) in the
form of the sis(4) driver. This device has support for VLANs. [MERGED]

The snc driver for the National Semiconductor DP8393X (SONIC) Ethernet
controller has been added. Currently, this driver is only used on the
PC-98 architecture. [MERGED]

The stf(4) device is now clonable.

The tap(4) driver, a virtual Ethernet device driver for bridged
configurations, has been added. This device is clonable. [MERGED]

The ti(4) driver now supports the Alteon AceNIC 1000baseT Gigabit
Ethernet and Netgear GA620T 1000baseT Gigabit cards. [MERGED]

The ti(4) driver correctly masks VLAN tags. [MERGED]

The txp(4) driver has been added to support NICs based on the 3Com 3XP
Typhoon/Sidewinder (3CR990) chipset. [MERGED]

vlan(4) devices are now loadable, unloadable, and clonable. [MERGED]

The wi(4) driver now has support for Prism II and Prism 2.5-based NICs.
104/128-bit WEP now works on Prism cards. [MERGED]

The xl(4) driver now supports the 3Com 3C556 and 3C556B MiniPCI adapters
used on some laptops. [MERGED]

The xl(4) driver now supports reception of VLAN tagged frames (on the
``Cyclone'' or newer chipsets). [MERGED]

The xl(4) driver now supports send- and receive-side TCP/IP checksum
offloading for NICs implementing this feature, such as the 3C905B,
3C905C, and 3C980C. [MERGED]

A bug in the xl(4) driver, related to statistics overflow interrupt
handling, was causing slowdowns at medium to high packet rates; this has
been fixed. [MERGED]

The per-interface ifnet structure now has the ability to indicate a set
of capabilities supported by a network interface, and which ones are
enabled. ifconfig(8) has support for querying these capabilities.
[MERGED]

Performance with hosts having a large number of IP aliases has been
improved, by replacing the per-interface if_inaddr linear list with a
hash table. [MERGED]

Network devices now automatically appear as special files in /dev/net.
Interface hardware ioctls (not protocol or routing) can be performed on
these devices. The SIOCGIFCONF ioctl may be performed on the special
/dev/network node.

Selected network drivers now implement a semi-polling mode, which makes
systems much more resilient to attacks and overloads. To enable polling,
the following options are required in a kernel configuration file:

        options DEVICE_POLLING
        options HZ=1000 # not compulsory but strongly recommended

The kern.polling.enable sysctl variable will then activate polling mode;
with the kern.polling.user_frac sysctl indicating the percentage of CPU
time to be reserved for userland. The devices initially supporting
polling are dc(4), fxp(4), and sis(4). More details can be found in the
polling(4) manual page. [MERGED]

The packet-forwarding performance of certain network drivers
(specifically dc(4) and sis(4)) has been enhanced by the elimination of
unnecessary buffer copies. [MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1.4 Network Protocols

accept_filter(9), a kernel feature to reduce overheads when accepting
and reading new connections on listening sockets, has been added.
[MERGED]

The proxy modifier to arp(8)'s -d option has been renamed to pub, for
consistency with the -s option. The only keyword has been added to the
-s and -S flags, to be used in creating ``proxy-only'' published
entries. [MERGED]

The read timeout feature of bpf(4) now works more correctly with
select(2)/ poll(2), and therefore with pthreads. [MERGED]

bridge(4) and dummynet(4) have received some enhancements and bug fixes,
and are now loadable modules. [MERGED]

bridge(4) now has better support for multiple, fully-independent
bridging clusters, and is much more stable in the presence of dynamic
attachments and detatchments. Full support for VLANs is also supported.
[MERGED]

ICMP ECHO and TSTAMP replies are now rate limited. TCP RSTs generated
due to packets sent to open and unopen ports are now limited by separate
counters. Each rate limiting queue now has its own description.

ICMP UNREACH_FILTER_PROHIB messages can now RST TCP connections in the
SYN_SENT state if the correct sequence numbers are sent back, as
controlled by the net.inet.tcp.icmp_may_rst sysctl.

IP multicast now works on VLAN devices. Several other bugs in the VLAN
code have also been fixed.

A bug in the IPSec processing for IPv4, which caused the inbound SPD
checks to be ignored, has been fixed. [MERGED]

ipfw(4) now filters correctly in the presence of ECN bits in TCP
segments. [MERGED]

A new ng_eth(4) netgraph node allows Ethernet type packets to be
filtered to different hooks depending on ethertype.

The ng_gif(4) and ng_gif_demux(4) netgraph nodes, for operating on
gif(4) devices, have been added.

The ng_ip_input(4) netgraph node, for queueing IP packets into the main
IP input processing code, has been added.

The ng_mppc(4) and ng_bridge(4) node types have been added to the
netgraph(4) subsystem. The ng_ether(4) node is now dynamically loadable.
Miscellaneous bug fixes and enhancements have also been made. [MERGED]

A new netgraph node type ng_one2many(4) for multiplexing and
demultiplexing packets over multiple links has been added. [MERGED]

A new sysctl net.inet.ip.check_interface, which is on by default, causes
IP to verify that an incoming packet arrives on an interface that has an
address matching the packet's destination address. [MERGED]

A new sysctl net.link.ether.inet.log_arp_wrong_iface has been added to
control the suppression of logging when ARP replies arrive on the wrong
interface. [MERGED]

A new options RANDOM_IP_ID kernel option causes the ID field of IP
packets to be randomized. This closes a minor information leak which
allows a remote observer to determine the rate at which the machine is
generating packets, since the default behavior is to increment a counter
for each packet sent. [MERGED]

TCP has received some bug fixes for its delayed ACK behavior. [MERGED]

TCP now supports the NewReno modification to the TCP Fast Recovery
algorithm. This behavior can be controlled via the net.inet.tcp.newreno
sysctl variable. [MERGED]

TCP now uses a more aggressive timeout for initial SYN segments; this
allows initial connection attempts to be dropped much faster. [MERGED]

The TCP_COMPAT_42 kernel option has been removed. [MERGED]

The TCP_RESTRICT_RST kernel option has been removed. Similar
functionality can be achieved with the net.inet.tcp.blackhole sysctl
variable. [MERGED]

TCP now has RFC 1323 extensions enabled by default in rc.conf(5).
[MERGED]

RFC 1323 and RFC 1644 TCP extensions are now disabled for a connection
in progress if no response has been received by the third SYN segment
sent. This behavior tries to work around (very old) terminal servers
with buggy VJ header compression implementations. [MERGED]

The TCP implementation no longer requires the allocation of a TCP
template structure for each connection; this should reduce the buffer
usage on large systems handling many connections. [MERGED]

TCP's default buffer sizes, controlled by the net.inet.tcp.sendspace and
net.inet.tcp.recvspace sysctl variables, have been increased to 32K and
64K respectively. Previously, the default for both buffer sizes was 16K.
To try to avoid increasing congestion, the default value for
net.inet.tcp.local_slowstart_flightsize has been changed from infinity
to 4. [MERGED]

  Note: On busy hosts, the new larger buffer sizes may require manually
  increasing the NMBCLUSTERS parameter, either in the kernel
  configuration file or via the kern.ipc.nmbclusters loader tunable.
  netstat -mb can be used to monitor the state of mbuf clusters.

TCP now supports RFC 1948 (Defending Against Sequence Number Attacks).
This functionality is controlled by the net.inet.tcp.strict_rfc1948 and
net.inet.tcp.isn_reseed_interval sysctl variables. [MERGED]

The TCP implementation in FreeBSD now implements a cache of outstanding,
received SYN segments. Incoming SYN segments now cause entries to be
placed in the cache until the TCP three-way handshake is complete, at
which point, memory is allocated for the connection as usual. In
addition, all TCP Initial Sequence Numbers (ISNs) are used as cookies,
allowing entries in the cache to be dropped, but still have their
corresponding ACKs accepted later. The combination of the so-called
``syncache'' and ``syncookies'' features makes a host much more
resistant to TCP-based Denial of Service attacks. Work on this feature
was sponsored by DARPA and NAI Labs. [MERGED]

A bug in the TCP implementation, which could cause connections to stall
if a sender saw a zero-sized window, has been corrected. [MERGED]

The TCP implementation now properly ignores packets addressed to
IP-layer broadcast addresses. [MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1.5 Disks and Storage

Support for the Adaptec FSA family of PCI-SCSI RAID controllers has been
added, in the form of the aac(4) driver. This driver includes proper
handling of commands initiated by the adapter, addition/removal of disk
devices, crashdump functionality, and ioctl(2) commands necessary for
the management CLI, and is fully qualified and sanctioned by Adaptec.
[MERGED]

The ahc(4) driver has received numerous updates, bugfixes, and
enhancements. Among various improvements are improved compatibility with
chips in ``RAID Port'' mode and systems with AAA and/or ARO cards
installed, as well as performance improvements. Some bugs were also
fixed, including a rare hang on Ultra2/U160 controllers. [MERGED]

The asr(4) driver, which provides support for the Adaptec SCSI RAID
controller family, as well as the DPT SmartRAID V and VI families, has
been added. [MERGED]

The asr(4) driver now supports the Adaptec 2000S and 2005S Zero-Channel
RAID controllers. [MERGED]

The ata(4) driver now has support for ATA100 controllers. In addition,
it now supports the ServerWorks ROSB4 ATA33 chipset, the CMD 648 ATA66
and CMD 649 ATA100 chipsets, and the Cyrix 5530. [MERGED]

To provide more flexible configuration, the various options for the
ata(4) driver are now boot loader tunables, rather than kernel
configure-time options. [MERGED]

The ata(4) driver now has support for tagged queuing, which is enabled
by the hw.ata.tags loader tunable. [MERGED]

The ata(4) driver now has support for ATA ``pseudo'' RAID controllers as
the Promise Fasttrak and HighPoint HPT370 controllers. [MERGED]

The ata(4) driver now supports a wider variety of SiS chipsets, as
listed in the Hardware Notes. [MERGED]

The ata(4) driver now has support for rebuilding failed drives in a
RAID1 configuration, under control of atacontrol(8)

The BurnProof(TM) feature, for applicable ATAPI CD-ROM burners, is now
supported. [MERGED]

The ata(4) driver now has support for 48-bit addressing. Devices larger
than 137GB are now supported. [MERGED]

The ata(4) driver now contains fixes for some data corruption problems
on systems using the VIA 82C686B Southbridge chip. [MERGED]

The CAM error recovery code has been updated.

The cd(4) driver now has support for write operations. This allows
writing to DVD-RAM, PD and similar drives that probe as CD devices. Note
that change affects only random-access writeable devices, not
sequential-only writeable devices such as CD-R drives, which are
supported by cdrecord(1) (a part of sysutils/cdrtools in the Ports
Collection. [MERGED]

The ciss driver, for devices utilizing the Common Interface for SCSI-3
Support, has been added. This driver supports the Compaq SmartRAID 5*
family of RAID controllers (5300, 532, 5i). [MERGED]

The fdc(4) floppy disk has undergone a number of enhancements. Density
selection for common settings is now automatic; the driver is also much
more flexible in setting the densities of various subdevices.

The ida disk driver now has crashdump support. [MERGED]

The iir driver has been added to support the Intel Integrated RAID
controllers, as well as prior ICP Vortex controllers.

The isp(4) driver is now proactive about discovering Fibre Channel
topology changes.

The isp(4) driver now supports target mode for Qlogic SCSI cards,
including Ultra2 and Ultra3 and dual bus cards.

The isp(4) driver now supports the Qlogic 2300 and 2312 Optical Fibre
Channel PCI cards. [MERGED]

md(4), the memory disk device, has had the functionality of vn(4)
incorporated into it. md(4) devices can now be configured by
mdconfig(8). vn(4) has been removed. The Memory Filesystem (MFS) has
also been removed.

The mly(4) driver, for Mylex PCI to SCSI AccelRAID and eXtremeRAID
controllers with firmware 6.X and later, has been added. [MERGED]

The ncv, nsp, and stg drivers have been ported from NetBSD/pc98. They
support the NCR 53C50 / Workbit Ninja SCSI-3 / TMC 18C30, 18C50 based
PC-Card/ISA SCSI controllers. All three drivers can be built and loaded
as modules. [MERGED]

Some problems in sa(4) error handling have been fixed, including the
``tape drive spinning indefinitely upon mt(1) stat'' problem.

The twe(4) 3ware ATA RAID driver has added. [MERGED]

The vinum(4) volume manager has received some bug fixes and
enhancements.

The wd(4) compatibility devices were removed from the ata(4) driver.
[MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1.6 Filesystems

Support for named extended attributes was added to the FreeBSD kernel.
This allows the kernel, and appropriately privileged userland processes,
to tag files and directories with attribute data. Extended attributes
were added to support the TrustedBSD Project, in particular ACLs,
capability data, and mandatory access control labels (see
/usr/src/sys/ufs/ufs/README.extattr for details).

Due to a licensing change, softupdates have been integrated into the
main portion of the kernel source tree. As a consequence, softupdates
are now available with the GENERIC kernel. [MERGED]

A filesystem snapshot capability has been added to FFS. Details can be
found in /usr/src/sys/ufs/ffs/README.snapshot.

Softupdates for FFS have received some bug fixes and enhancements.

When running with softupdates, statfs(2) and df(1) will track the number
of blocks and files that are committed to being freed.

A bug in FFS that could cause superblock corruption on very large
filesystems has been corrected. [MERGED]

The Inode Filesystem (IFS) has been added; more information can be found
in /usr/src/sys/ufs/ifs/README.

The ISO-9660 filesystem now has a hook that supports a loadable
character conversion routine. The sysutils/cd9660_unicode port contains
a set of common conversions.

kernfs(5) is obsolete and has been retired.

A bug in the NFS client that caused bogus access times with
O_EXCL|O_CREAT opens was fixed. [MERGED]

A new NFS hash function (based on the Fowler/Noll/Vo hash algorithm) has
been implemented to improve NFS performance by increasing the efficiency
of the nfsnode hash tables. [MERGED]

Client-side NFS locks have been implemented.

The client-side and server-side of the NFS code in the kernel used to be
intertwined in various complex ways. They have been split apart for ease
of maintenance and further development.

Support for filesystem Access Control Lists (ACLs) has been introduced,
allowing more fine-grained control of discretionary access control on
files and directories. This support was integrated from the TrustedBSD
Project. More details can be found in /usr/src/sys/ufs/ufs/README.acls.

The directory layout preference algorithm for FFS (dirprefs) has been
changed. Rather than scattering directory blocks across a disk, it
attempts to group related directory blocks together. Operations
traversing large directory hierarchies, such as the FreeBSD Ports tree,
have shown marked speedups. This change is transparent and automatic for
new directories. [MERGED]

smbfs (CIFS) support in kernel has been added. The userland programs
smbutil(1) and mount_smbfs(8) can be used to work with SMB shares. Note
that mount_smbfs(8) will automatically load the smbfs.ko module into the
kernel, even if LIBMCHAIN and LIBICONV were not compiled into the
kernel. [MERGED]

For consistency, the fdesc, fifo, null, msdos, portal, umap, and union
filesystems have been renamed to fdescfs, fifofs, msdosfs, nullfs,
portalfs, umapfs, and unionfs. Where applicable, modules and mount_*
programs have been renamed. Compatibility ``glue'' has been added to
mount(8) so that msdos filesystem entries in fstab(5) will work without
changes.

pseudofs, a pseudo-filesystem framework, has been added. linprocfs(5)
and procfs(5) have been modified to use pseudofs.

A simple hash-based lookup optimization for large directories called
dirhash has been added. Conditional on the UFS_DIRHASH kernel option
(enabled by default in the GENERIC kernel), it improves the speed of
operations on very large directories at the expense of some memory.
[MERGED]

The virtual memory subsystem now backs UFS directory memory requirements
by default (this behavior is controlled via the vfs.vmiodirenable sysctl
variable). [MERGED]

A bug that prevented the root filesystem from being mounted from a SCSI
CDROM has been fixed (ATAPI CDROMs were always supported). [MERGED]

A number of bugs in the filesystem code, discovered through the use of
the fsx filesystem test tool, have been fixed. Under certain
circumstances (primarily related to use of NFS), these bugs could cause
data corruption or kernel panics. [MERGED]

Network filesystems (such as NFS and smbfs filesystems) listed in
/etc/fstab can now be properly mounted during startup initialization;
their mounts are deferred until after the network is initialized.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1.7 PCCARD Support

The pccard driver and pccardc(8) now support multiple ``beep types''
upon card insertion and removal. [MERGED]

On many modern hosts, PCCARD devices can be configured to route their
interrupts via either the ISA or PCI interrupt paths. The pcic(4) driver
has been updated to support both interrupt paths (formerly, only routing
via ISA was supported). [MERGED] In most cases, configuration of PCMCIA
devices in laptops is simpler and more flexible. In addition, various
Cardbus bridge PCI cards (such as those used by Orinoco PCI NICs) are
now supported. Some hosts may experience problems, such as hangs or
panics, with PCI interrupt routing; they can frequently be made to work
by forcing the older-style ISA interrupt routing. The following lines,
placed in /boot/loader.conf, may fix the problem:

        hw.pcic.intr_path="1"
          hw.pcic.irq="0"

When installing FreeBSD on such a system, typing the following lines to
the boot loader may be helpful in starting up FreeBSD for the first
time:

        ok set hw.pcic.intr_path="1"
        ok set hw.pcic.irq="0"

Preliminary Cardbus support under NEWCARD has been added. This code
supports the TI113X, TI12XX, TI125X, Ricoh 5C46/5C47, Topic 95/97/100
and Cirrus Logic PD683X bridges. 16-bit PC Card support is not yet
functional.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1.8 Multimedia Support

The pcm(4) driver now supports the ESS Solo 1, Maestro-1, Maestro-2, and
Maestro-2e; Forte Media fm801, ESS Maestro-2e, and VIA Technologies
VT82C686A sound card/chipsets, and has received some other updates.
Separate drivers for the SoundBlaster 8 and SoundBlaster 16 now replace
an older, unified driver. A driver for the CMedia CMI8338/CMI8738 sound
chips has been added. A driver for the CS4281 sound chip has been added.
A driver for the S3 SonicVibes chipset has been added. [MERGED]

A driver for the Avance Logic ALS4000 has been added. [MERGED]

A driver for the ESS Maestro-3/Allegro has been added, however due to
licensing restrictions, it cannot be compiled into the kernel. [MERGED]
To use this driver, add the following line to /boot/loader.conf:

        snd_maestro3_load="YES"

The bktr(4) driver has been updated to 2.18. This update provides a
number of new features. New tuner types have been added, and
improvements to the KLD module and to memory allocation have been made.
Bugs in devfs(5) when unloading and reloading have been fixed. Support
for new Hauppauge Model 44xxx WinTV Cards (the ones with no audio mux)
has been added. [MERGED]

The ufm driver, supporting the D-Link DSB-R100 USB Radio, has been
added. [MERGED]

When sound modules are built, one can now load all the drivers and
infrastructure by kldload snd. [MERGED]

A new API has been added for sound cards with hardware volume control.

A driver for the Intel 443MX, 810, 815, and 815E integrated sound
devices has been added. [MERGED]

The via82c686 sound driver now supports the VIA VT8233. [MERGED]

The ich sound driver now support the SiS 7012 chipset. [MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1.9 Contributed Software

The Forth Inspired Command Language (FICL) used in the boot loader has
been updated to 2.05.

Support for Advanced Configuration and Power Interface (ACPI), a
multi-vendor standard for configuration and power management, has been
added. This functionality has been provided by the Intel ACPI Component
Architecture project, as of the ACPI CA 20020308 snapshot. Some backward
compatability for applications using the older APM standard has been
provided.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1.9.1 IPFilter

IPFilter has been updated to 3.4.20. [MERGED]

IPFilter now supports IPv6. [MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1.9.2 isdn4bsd

isdn4bsd has been updated to version 1.0.1. As a result of this update,
users of the i4bisppp(4) (kernel PPP over ISDN) driver must now use
ispppcontrol(8) instead of spppcontrol(8) to configure and control these
network interfaces. [MERGED]

The ifpi(4) driver for supporting the AVM Fritz!Card PCI version 2
controller has been added.

The ihfc(4) driver for supporting Cologne Chip Designs HFC devices under
isdn4bsd has been added. [MERGED]

The itjc(4) driver for supporting NETjet-S / Teles PCI-TJ devices under
isdn4bsd has been added. [MERGED]

Experimental support for the Eicon.Diehl DIVA 2.0 and 2.02 ISA PnP ISDN
cards has been added to the isic(4) isdn4bsd driver. [MERGED]

The isic(4) driver now supports the Compaq Microcom 610 ISDN ISA PnP
card. [MERGED]

Active CAPI-based ISDN cards manufactured by AVM are now supported using
the i4bcapi(4) and the iavc(4) driver. The supported cards are the AVM
B1 PCI and AVM B1 ISA Basic Rate cards and the AVM T1 Primary Rate
cards. [MERGED]

A new maxconnecttime keyword is now accepted in isdnd.rc(5) files to
limit the time a connection may remain open. [MERGED]

isdnphone(8) now supports a -k option for sending messages via the
keypad facility to a PBX or exchange office. [MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.1.9.3 KAME

The IPv6 stack is now based on a snapshot based on the KAME Project's
IPv6 snapshot as of 28 May, 2001. Most of the items listed in this
section are a result of this import. Section 2.3.1.3 lists userland
updates to the KAME IPv6 stack. [MERGED]

gif(4) is now based on RFC 2893, rather than RFC 1933. The IFF_LINK2
interface flag can be used to control ingress filtering. [MERGED]

IPSec has received some enhancements, including the ability to use the
Rijndael and SHA2 algorithms. IPSec RC5 support has been removed due to
patent issues. [MERGED]

stf(4) now conforms to RFC 3056; the IFF_LINK2 interface flag can be
used to control ingress filtering. [MERGED]

IPv6 has better checking of illegal addresses (such as loopback
addresses) on physical networks. [MERGED]

The IPV6_V6ONLY socket option is now completely supported. The kernel's
default behavior with respect to this option is controlled by the
net.inet6.ip6.v6only sysctl variable. [MERGED]

RFC 3041 (Privacy Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration) is
now supported. It can be enabled via the net.inet6.ip6.use_tempaddr
sysctl variable. [MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.2 Security-Related Changes

sysinstall(8) now allows the user to select one of two ``security
profiles'' at install-time. These profiles enable different levels of
system security by enabling or disabling various system services in
rc.conf(5) on new installs. [MERGED]

A bug in which malformed ELF executable images can hang the system has
been fixed (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-00:41). [MERGED]

A security hole in Linux emulation was fixed (see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-00:42). [MERGED]

String-handling library calls in many programs were fixed to reduce the
possibility of buffer overflow-related exploits. [MERGED]

TCP now uses stronger randomness in choosing its initial sequence
numbers (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-00:52). [MERGED]

Several buffer overflows in tcpdump(1) were corrected (see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-00:61). [MERGED]

A security hole in top(1) was corrected (see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-00:62). [MERGED]

A potential security hole caused by an off-by-one-error in
gethostbyname(3) has been fixed (see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-00:63). [MERGED]

A potential buffer overflow in the ncurses(3) library, which could cause
arbitrary code to be run from within systat(1), has been corrected (see
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-00:68). [MERGED]

A vulnerability in telnetd(8) that could cause it to consume large
amounts of server resources has been fixed (see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-00:69). [MERGED]

The nat deny_incoming command in ppp(8) now works correctly (see
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-00:70). [MERGED]

A vulnerability in csh(1)/ tcsh(1) temporary files that could allow
overwriting of arbitrary user-writable files has been closed (see
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-00:76). [MERGED]

The ssh(1) binary is no longer SUID root by default. [MERGED]

Some fixes were applied to the Kerberos IV implementation related to
environment variables, a possible buffer overrun, and overwriting ticket
files. [MERGED]

telnet(1) now does a better job of sanitizing its environment. [MERGED]

Several vulnerabilities in procfs(5) were fixed (see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-00:77). [MERGED]

A bug in OpenSSH in which a server was unable to disable ssh-agent(1) or
X11Forwarding was fixed (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:01).
[MERGED]

A bug in ipfw(8) and ip6fw(8) in which inbound TCP segments could
incorrectly be treated as being part of an established connection has
been fixed (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:08). [MERGED]

A bug in crontab(1) that could allow users to read any file on the
system in valid crontab(5) syntax has been fixed (see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-01:09). [MERGED]

A vulnerability in inetd(8) that could allow read-access to the initial
16 bytes of wheel-accessible files has been fixed (see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-01:11). [MERGED]

A bug in periodic(8) that used insecure temporary files has been
corrected (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:12). [MERGED]

A bug in sort(1) in which an attacker might be able to cause it to abort
processing has been fixed (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:13).
[MERGED]

OpenSSH now has code to prevent (instead of just mitigating through
connection limits) an attack that can lead to guessing the server key
(not host key) by regenerating the server key when an RSA failure is
detected (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:24). [MERGED]

A number of programs have had output formatting strings corrected so as
to reduce the risk of vulnerabilities. [MERGED]

A number of programs that use temporary files now do so more securely.
[MERGED]

A bug in ICMP that could cause an attacker to disrupt TCP and UDP
``sessions'' has been corrected. [MERGED]

A bug in timed(8), which caused it to crash if send certain malformed
packets, has been corrected (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:28).
[MERGED]

A bug in rwhod(8), which caused it to crash if send certain malformed
packets, has been corrected (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:29).
[MERGED]

A security hole in FreeBSD's FFS and EXT2FS implementations, which
allowed a race condition that could cause users to have unauthorized
access to data, has been fixed (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:30).
[MERGED]

A remotely-exploitable vulnerability in ntpd(8) has been closed (see
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:31). [MERGED]

A security hole in IPFilter's fragment cache has been closed (see
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:32). [MERGED]

Buffer overflows in glob(3), which could cause arbitrary code to be run
on an FTP server, have been closed. In addition, to prevent some forms
of DOS attacks, glob(3) allows specification of a limit on the number of
pathname matches it will return. ftpd(8) now uses this feature (see
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:33). [MERGED]

Initial sequence numbers in TCP are more thoroughly randomized (see
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:39). Due to some possible compatibility
issues, the behavior of this security fix can be enabled or disabled via
the net.inet.tcp.tcp_seq_genscheme sysctl variable.[MERGED]

A vulnerability in the fts(3) routines (used by applications for
recursively traversing a filesystem) could allow a program to operate on
files outside the intended directory hierarchy. This bug has been fixed
(see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:40). [MERGED]

FreeBSD's TCP implementation has been made more resistant to SYN floods,
by eliminating the RST segment normally sent when removing a connection
from the listen queue.

OpenSSH now switches to the user's UID before attempting to unlink the
authentication forwarding file, nullifying the effects of a race.

A flaw allowed some signal handlers to remain in effect in a child
process after being exec-ed from its parent. This allowed an attacker to
execute arbitrary code in the context of a setuid binary. This flaw has
been corrected (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:42). [MERGED]

A remote buffer overflow in tcpdump(1) has been fixed (see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:48). [MERGED]

A remote buffer overflow in telnetd(8) has been fixed (see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:49). [MERGED]

The new net.inet.ip.maxfragpackets and net.inet.ip6.maxfragpackets
sysctl variables limit the amount of memory that can be consumed by IPv4
and IPv6 packet fragments, which defends against some denial of service
attacks (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:52). [MERGED]

All services in inetd.conf are now disabled by default for new
installations. sysinstall(8) gives the option of enabling or disabling
inetd(8) on new installations, as well as editing inetd.conf. [MERGED]

A flaw in the implementation of the ipfw(8) me rules on point-to-point
links has been corrected. Formerly, me filter rules would match the
remote IP address of a point-to-point interface in addition to the
intended local IP address (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:53).
[MERGED]

A vulnerability in procfs(5), which could allow a process to read
sensitive information from another process's memory space, has been
closed (see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:55). [MERGED]

The PARANOID hostname checking in tcp_wrappers now works as advertised
(see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:56). [MERGED]

A local root exploit in sendmail(8) has been closed (see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:57). [MERGED]

A remote root vulnerability in lpd(8) has been closed (see security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-01:58). [MERGED]

A race condition in rmuser(8) that briefly exposed a world-readable
/etc/master.passwd has been fixed (see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-01:59). [MERGED]

A vulnerability in UUCP has been closed (see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-01:62). All non-root-owned binaries in standard system paths
now have the schg flag set to prevent exploit vectors when run by
cron(8), by root, or by a user other then the one owning the binary. In
addition, uustat(1) is now run via /etc/periodic/daily/410.status-uucp
as uucp, not root. In FreeBSD -CURRENT, UUCP has since been moved to the
Ports Collection and no longer a part of the base system. [MERGED]

A security hole in the form of a buffer overflow in the semop(2) system
call has been closed. [MERGED]

A security hole in OpenSSH, which could allow users to execute code with
arbitrary privileges if UseLogin yes was set, has been closed. Note that
the default value of this setting is UseLogin no. (See security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-01:63.) [MERGED]

The use of an insecure temporary directory by pkg_add(1) could permit a
local attacker to modify the contents of binary packages while they were
being installed. This hole has been closed. (See security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:01.) [MERGED]

A race condition in pw(8), which could expose the contents of
/etc/master.passwd, has been eliminated. (See security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:02.) [MERGED]

A bug in k5su(8) could have allowed a process that had given up
superuser privileges to regain them. This bug has been fixed. (See
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:07.) [MERGED]

An ``off-by-one'' bug has been fixed in OpenSSH's multiplexing code.
This bug could have allowed an authenticated remote user to cause
sshd(8) to execute arbitrary code with superuser privileges, or allowed
a malicious SSH server to execute arbitrary code on the client system
with the privileges of the client user. (See security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:13.) [MERGED]

A programming error in zlib could result in attempts to free memory
multiple times. The malloc(3)/ free(3) routines used in FreeBSD are not
vulnerable to this error, but applications receiving specially-crafted
blocks of invalid compressed data could be made to function incorrectly
or abort. This zlib bug has been fixed. For a workaround and solutions,
see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:18. [MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3 Userland Changes

If the first argument to ancontrol(8) or wicontrol(8) doesn't start with
a -, it is assumed to be an interface.

apmd(8) now has the ability to monitor battery levels and execute
commands based on percentage or minutes of battery life remaining via
the apm_battery configuration directive. See the commented-out examples
in /etc/apmd.conf for the syntax. [MERGED]

arp(8) now prints the applicable interface name for each ARP entry.
[MERGED]

arp(8) now prints [fddi] or [atm] tags for addresses on interfaces of
those types.

atacontrol(8) has been added to control various aspects of the ata(4)
driver.

boot98cfg(8), a PC-98 boot manager installation and configuration
utility, has been added. [MERGED]

burncd(8) now supports a -m option for multisession mode (the default
behavior now is to close disks as single-session). A -l option to take a
list of image files from a filename was also added; - can be used as a
filename for stdin. [MERGED]

burncd(8) now supports Disk At Once (DAO) mode, selectable via the -d
flag.

burncd(8) now has the ability to write VCDs/SVCDs.

c89(1) has been converted from a shell script to a binary executable,
fixing some minor bugs. [MERGED]

A minimalized version of camcontrol(8) is now available on the
installation floppy. This allows it to rescan for devices that have been
connected after booting, or to show the devices attached to SCSI busses
(e. g. from within the ``emergency holographic shell''). [MERGED]

cat(1) now has the ability to read from UNIX-domain sockets. [MERGED]

cdcontrol(1) now supports a cdid command, which calculates and displays
the CD serial number, using the same algorithm used by the CDDB
database. [MERGED]

cdcontrol(1) now uses the CDROM environment variable to pick a default
device. [MERGED]

cdcontrol(1) now supports next and prev commands to skip forwards or
backwards a specified number of tracks while playing an audio CD.
[MERGED]

chflags(1) has moved from /usr/bin to /bin.

chio(1) now has the ability to specify elements by volume tag instead of
by their physical location as well as the ability to return an element
to its previous location. [MERGED]

chmod(1) now supports a -h for changing the mode of a symbolic link.

chown(8) now correctly follows symbolic links named as command line
arguments if run without -R. [MERGED]

chown(8) no longer takes . as a user/group delimeter. This change was
made to support usernames containing a ..

Use of the CSMG_* macros no longer require inclusion of <sys/param.h>

col(1) now takes a -p flag to force unknown control sequences to be
passed through unchanged. [MERGED]

The compat3x distribution has been updated to include libraries present
in FreeBSD 3.5.1-RELEASE. [MERGED]

A compat4x distribution has been added for compatibility with FreeBSD
4-STABLE.

config(8) is now better about converting various warnings that should
have been errors into actual fatal errors with an exit code. This
ensures that make buildkernel doesn't quietly ignore them and build a
bogus kernel without a human to read the errors. [MERGED]

A number of buffer overflows in config(8) have been fixed. [MERGED]

ctags(1) no longer creates a corrupt tags file if the source file used
// (C++-style) comments. [MERGED]

The daemon(8) program, a command-line interface to daemon(3), has been
added. It detaches itself from its controlling terminal and executes a
program specified on the command line. This allows the user to run an
arbitrary program as if it were written to be a daemon.

devinfo, a simple tool to print the device tree and resource usage by
devices, has been added.

df(1) now takes a -l option to only display information about
locally-mounted filesystems. [MERGED]

disklabel(8) now supports partition sizes expressed in kilobytes,
megabytes, or gigabytes, in addition to sectors. [MERGED]

dmesg(8) now has a -a option to show the entire message buffer,
including syslogd(8) records and /dev/console output. [MERGED]

du(1) now takes a -I command-line flag to ignore/skip files and
subdirectories matching a specified shell-glob mask. [MERGED]

dump(8) now supports inheritance of the nodump flag down a hierarchy.
[MERGED]

The -T option to dump(8) no longer swallows an extra argument. [MERGED]

dump(8) has a new -D option, allowing the path to the /etc/dumpdates
file to be changed. [MERGED]

dump(8) now supplies progress information in its process title, useful
for monitoring automated backups. [MERGED]

dump(8) now supports a new -S to allow it to just print out the dump
size estimates and exit.

edquota(8) now takes a -f option to allow limiting the prototype quota
distribution (specified with -p) to a single filesystem. [MERGED]

/etc/rc.firewall and /etc/rc.firewall6 will no longer add their own
hardcoded rules in the cases of a rules file in the firewall_type
variable or a non-existent firewall type. (The motivation for this
change is to avoid acting on assumptions about a site's firewall
policies.) In addition, the closed firewall type now works as documented
in the rc.firewall(8) manual page. [MERGED]

The functionality of /etc/security has been been moved into a set of
scripts under the periodic(8) framework, to make local customization
easier and more maintainable. These scripts now reside in
/etc/periodic/security/. [MERGED]

fbtab(5) now accepts glob matching patterns for target devices, not just
individual devices and directories.

fdisk(8) no longer attempts to search for a device if none has been
specified on the command line, but instead tries to figure out the
default device name from the root device.

fdread(1), a program to read data from floppy disks, has been added. It
is a counterpart to fdwrite(1) and is designed to provide a means of
recovering at least some data from bad media, and to obviate for a
complex invocation of dd(1).

find(1) now takes the -empty flag, which returns true if a file or
directory is empty. [MERGED]

find(1) now takes the -iname and -ipath primaries for case-insensitive
matches, and the -regexp and -iregexp primaries for regular-expression
matches. The -E flag now enables extended regular expressions. [MERGED]

find(1) now has the -anewer, -cnewer, -mnewer, -okdir, and
-newer[acm][acmt] primaries for comparisons of file timestamps. The
latter primaries can be specified with various units of time. [MERGED]

finger(1) now has the ability to support fingering aliases, via the
finger.conf(5) file. [MERGED]

finger(1) now has support for a .pubkey file.

fmt(1) has been rewritten; the rewrite fixes a number of bugs compared
to its prior behavior. [MERGED]

fmtcheck(3), a function for checking consistency of format string
arguments, has been added. [MERGED]

fsck(8) wrappers have been imported; this feature provides
infrastructure for fsck(8) to work on different types of filesystems
(analogous to mount(8)).

The behavior of fsck(8) when dealing with various passes (a la
/etc/fstab) has been modified to accommodate multiple-disk filesystems.

fsck(8) now has support for foreground (-F) and background (-B) checks.
Traditionally, fsck(8) is invoked before the filesystems are mounted and
all checks are done to completion at that time. If background checking
is available, fsck(8) is invoked twice. It is first invoked at the
traditional time, before the filesystems are mounted, with the -F flag
to do checking on all the filesystems that cannot do background
checking. It is then invoked a second time, after the system has
completed going multiuser, with the -B flag to do checking on all the
filesystems that can do background checking. Unlike the foreground
checking, the background checking is started asynchronously so that
other system activity can proceed even on the filesystems that are being
checked. Boot-time enabling of this feature is controlled by the
background_fsck option in rc.conf(5).

Shortly after the receipt of a SIGINFO signal (normally control-T from
the controlling tty), fsck_ffs(8) will now output a line indicating the
current phase number and progress information relevant to the current
phase. [MERGED]

fsck_ffs(8) now supports background filesystem checks to mounted FFS
filesystems with the -B option (softupdates must be enabled on these
filesystems). The -F flag now determines whether a specified filesystem
needs foreground checking.

A new fsck_msdosfs(8) utility has been added to check the consistency of
MS-DOS filesystems. [MERGED]

ftpd(8) now supports a -r flag for read-only mode and a -E flag to
disable EPSV. It also has some fixes to reduce information leakage and
the ability to specify compile-time port ranges. [MERGED]

ftpd(8) now supports -o and -O options to disable the RETR command; the
former for everybody, and the latter only for guest users. Coupled with
-A and appropriate file permissions, these can be used to create a
relatively safe anonymous FTP drop box for others to upload to.

gdb(1) now supports hardware watchpoints (using the kernel's debug
register + support that has been introduced in FreeBSD 4.0). [MERGED]

The getprogname(3) and setprogname(3) library functions have been added
to manipulate the name of the current program. They are used by
error-reporting routines to produce consistent output. [MERGED]

gprof(1) now has a -K option to enable dynamic symbol resolution from
the currently-running kernel. With this change, properly-compiled KLD
modules are now able to be profiled.

growfs(8), a utility for growing FFS filesystems, has been added.
ffsinfo(8), a utility for dump all the meta-information of an existing
filesystem, has also been added. [MERGED]

The groups(1) and whoami(1) shell scripts are now unnecessary; their
functionality has been completely folded into id(1). [MERGED]

The ibcs2(8), linux(8), osf1(8), and svr4(8) scripts, whose sole purpose
was to load emulation kernel modules, have been removed. The kernel
module system will automatically load them as needed to fulfill
dependencies.

indent(1) has gained some new formatting options. [MERGED]

ifconfig(8) command can set the link-layer address of an interface using
the lladdr parameter. [MERGED]

ifconfig(8) can now accept addresses in slash/CIDR notation. [MERGED]

ifconfig(8) now has support for setting parameters for IEEE 802.11
wireless network devices. wi(4) and an(4) devices are supported, and
partial support is provided for awi(4) devices. [MERGED]

ifconfig(8) no longer displays the list of supported media by default.
Instead it displays it when the -m flag is given. [MERGED]

The syntax of inetd(8)'s support for faithd(8) is now compatible with
that of other BSDs. [MERGED]

The ident protocol support in inetd(8) has been cleaned up and updated.
[MERGED]

inetd(8) now has the ability to manage UNIX-domain sockets. [MERGED]

install(1) has a number of new features, including the -b and -B options
for backing up existing target files and the -S option for ``safe''
(atomic copy) operation. The -c (copy) flag is now the default, and the
-D (debugging) flag has been withdrawn. install(1) now issues a warning
if -d (create directories) and -C (copy changed files only) are used
together. [MERGED]

IP Filter is now supported by the rc.conf(5) boot-time configuration and
initialization. [MERGED]

ipfstat(8) now supports the -t option to turn on a top(1)-like display.
[MERGED]

ipfw(8) will now avoid the display of dynamic firewall rules unless the
-d flag is passed to it. The -e option lists expired dynamic rules.
[MERGED]

ipfw(8) has a new feature (me) that allows for packet matching on
interfaces with dynamically-changing IP addresses. [MERGED]

ipfw(8) has a new limit type of firewall rule, which limits the number
of sessions between address pairs. [MERGED]

ipfw(8) filter rules can now match on the value of the IPv4 precedence
field.

ip6fw(8) now has the ability to use a preprocessor and use the -q
(quiet) flag when reading from a file. [MERGED]

kenv(1), a command to dump the kernel environment, has been added.
[MERGED]

keyinfo(1) is now a C program, rather than a Perl script. [MERGED]

killall(1) is now a C program, rather than a Perl script. As a result,
its -m option now uses the regular expression syntax of regex(3), rather
than that of perl(1). [MERGED]

killall(1) now allows non-root users to kill SUID root processes that
they started, the same as the Perl version did. [MERGED]

The kldconfig(8) utility has been added to make it easier to manipulate
the kernel module search path. [MERGED]

last(1) now implements a -d that provides a ``snapshot'' of who was
logged in at a particular date and time. [MERGED]

last(1) now supports a -y flag, which causes the year to be included in
the session start time.

The lastlogin(8) utility, which prints the last login time of each user,
has been imported from NetBSD. [MERGED]

ldconfig(8) now checks directory ownerships and permissions for greater
security; these checks can be disabled with the -i flag. [MERGED]

ldd(1) can now be used on shared libraries, in addition to executables.
[MERGED]

ldd(1) now supports a -a flag to list all the objects that are needed by
each loaded object.

libc is now thread-safe by default; libc_r contains only thread
functions.

libcrypt and libdescrypt have been unified to provide a configurable
password authentication hash library. Both the md5 and des hash methods
are provided unless the des hash is specifically compiled out. [MERGED]

libcrypt now has support for Blowfish password hashing. [MERGED]

libdisk can now do install-time configuration of the boot0 boot loader.
[MERGED]

libstand now has support for filesystems containing bzip2-compressed
files. [MERGED]

libstand now has support for overwriting the contents of a file on a UFS
filesystem (it cannot expand or truncate files because the filesystem
may be dirty or inconsistent).

The default TCP port range used by libfetch for passive FTP retrievals
has changed; this affects the behavior of fetch(1), which has gained the
-U option to restore the old behavior. [MERGED]

libfetch now has support for an authentication callback. [MERGED]

libfetch now has support for a HTTP_USER_AGENT environment variable.
[MERGED]

libgmp has been superceded by libmp.

The functions from libposix1e have been integrated into libc.

ln(1) now takes an -i option to request user confirmation before
overwriting an existing file. [MERGED]

ln(1) now takes a -h flag to avoid following a target that is a link,
with a -n flag for compatibility with other implementations. [MERGED]

logger(1) can now send messages directly to a remote syslog. [MERGED]

login(1) now exports environment variables set by PAM modules. [MERGED]

lpc(8) has been improved; lpc clean is now somewhat safer, and a new
lpc tclean command has been added to check to see what files would be
removed by lpc clean. [MERGED]

lpd(8) now takes two new options: -c will log all connection errors to
syslogd(8), while -W will allow connections from non-reserved ports.
[MERGED]

lpd(8) now has some support for o-type print-file actions in its control
files, which allows printing of PostScript files generated by MacOS
10.1. [MERGED]

lpr(1), lpq(1), and lpd(8) have received a few minor enhancements.
[MERGED]

Catching up with most other network utilities in the base system,
lpr(1), lpd(8), syslogd(8), and logger(1) are now all IPv6-capable.
[MERGED]

lprm - now works for remote printer queues. [MERGED]

ls(1) can produce colorized listings with the -G flag (and appropriate
terminal support). The CLICOLOR environment variable can be set to
enable colorized listings by default. [MERGED]

mail(1) now takes a -E flag to avoid sending messages with empty bodies.
[MERGED]

make(1) has gained the :C/// (regular expression substitution), :L
(lowercase), and :U (uppercase) variable modifiers. These were added to
reduce the differences between the FreeBSD and OpenBSD/NetBSD make(1)
programs. [MERGED]

Bugs in make(1), among which include broken null suffix behavior, bad
assumptions about current directory permissions, and potential buffer
overflows, have been fixed. [MERGED]

The new CPUTYPE make.conf variable controls the compilation of
processor-specific optimizations in various pieces of code such as
OpenSSL. [MERGED]

The FreeBSD Makefile infrastructure now supports the WARNS directive
from NetBSD. This directive controls the addition of compiler warning
flags to CFLAGS in a relatively compiler-neutral manner. [MERGED]

man(1) is no longer installed SUID man, in order to reduce
vulnerabilities associated with generating ``catpages'' (preformatted
manual pages cached for repeated viewing). As a result, man(1) can no
longer create system catpages on a regular user's behalf. It is still
able to do so if the user has write permissions to the directory holding
catpages (e.g. a user's own manpages) or if the running user is root.

The mdmfs(8) command has been added; it is a wrapper around mdconfig(8),
disklabel(8), newfs(8), and mount(8) that mimics the command line option
set of the deprecated mount_mfs(8).

mergemaster(8) now sources an /etc/mergemaster.rc file and also prompts
the user to run recommended commands (such as newaliases) as needed.
[MERGED]

moused(8) now takes a -a option to control mouse acceleration. [MERGED]

mtree(8) now includes support for a file that lists pathnames to be
excluded when creating and verifying prototypes. This makes it easier to
use mtree(8) as a part of an intrusion-detection system. [MERGED]

natd(8) now supports a -log_ipfw_denied option to log packets that
cannot be re-injected because they are blocked by ipfw(8) rules.
[MERGED]

The ``in use'' percentage metric displayed by netstat(1) now really
reflects the percentage of network mbufs used. [MERGED]

netstat(1) now has a -W flag that tells it not to truncate addresses,
even if they're too long for the column they're printed in. [MERGED]

netstat(1) now keeps track of input and output packets on a per-address
basis for each interface. [MERGED]

netstat(1) now has a -z flag to reset statistics. [MERGED]

netstat(1) now has a -S flag to print address numerically but port names
symbolically. [MERGED]

newfs(8) now implements write combining, which can make creation of new
filesystems up to seven times faster. [MERGED]

newfs(8) now takes a -U option to enable softupdates on a new
filesystem. [MERGED]

The default number of cylinders per group in newfs(8) is now computed to
be the maximum allowable given the current filesystem parameters. It can
be overridden with the -c option. Formerly, the default was fixed at 16.
This change leads to better fsck(8) performance and reduced
fragmentation. [MERGED]

The default block and fragment sizes for new filesystems created by
newfs(8) are now 16384 and 2048 bytes, respectively (the old defaults
were 8192 and 1024 bytes). This change generally provides increased
performance, at the expense of some wasted disk space. [MERGED]

newsyslog(8) now has the ability to compress log files using bzip2(1).
[MERGED]

NFS now works over IPv6.

ngctl(8) now supports a write command to send a data packet down a given
hook. [MERGED]

nl(1), a line numbering filter program, has been added. [MERGED]

nsswitch support has been merged from NetBSD. By creating an
nsswitch.conf(5) file, FreeBSD can be configured so that various
databases such as passwd(5) and group(5) can be looked up using flat
files, NIS, or Hesiod. The old hosts.conf file is no longer used.

PAM support has been added for account management and sessions.

PAM configuration is now specified by files in /etc/pam.d/, rather than
a single /etc/pam.conf file. /etc/pam.d/README has more details.

A number of new PAM modules have been added.

passwd(1) and pw(8) now select the password hash algorithm at run time.
See the passwd_format attribute in /etc/login.conf. [MERGED]

pax(1) has received a number of enhancements, including cpio(1)
functionality, tar(1) compatibility enhancements, -z and -Z flags for
gzip(1) and compress(1) functionality, and a number of bug fixes.

pciconf(8) now supports a -v option to display the vendor/device
information of configured devices, in conjunction with the -l option.
The default vendor/device database can be found at
/usr/share/misc/pci_vendors. [MERGED]

The behavior of periodic(8) is now controlled by
/etc/defaults/periodic.conf and /etc/periodic.conf. [MERGED]

ping(8) now supports a -m option to set the TTL of outgoing packets.
[MERGED]

ping(8) now supports a -A option to beep when packets are lost. [MERGED]

Userland ppp(8) has received a number of updates and bug fixes. [MERGED]

ppp(8) has gained the tcpmssfixup option, which adjusts outgoing and
incoming TCP SYN packets so that the maximum receive segment size is no
larger than allowed by the interface MTU. [MERGED]

ppp(8) now supports IPv6.

pppd(8) (the control program for kernel-level PPP) is now installed mode
4550 and root:dialer, rather than mode 4555 (in other words, it is no
longer world-executable). Users of pppd(8) may need to change their
group settings. [MERGED]

The -W option to ps(1) (to extract information from a specified swap
device) has been useless for some time; it has been removed. [MERGED]

pwd(1) can now double as realpath(1), a program to resolve pathnames to
their underlying physical paths. [MERGED]

The pseudo-random number generator implemented by rand(3) has been
improved to provide less biased results.

rc(8) now has an framework for handling dependencies between rc.conf(5)
variables. [MERGED]

rc(8) now deletes all non-directory files in /var/run and
/var/spool/lock at boot time. [MERGED]

rcmd(3) now supports the use of the RSH environment variable to specify
a program to use other than rsh(1) for remote execution. As a result,
programs such as dump(8), can use ssh(1) for remote transport.

rdist(1) has been retired from the base system, but is still available
from FreeBSD Ports Collection as net/44bsd-rdist.

The resolver(3) in FreeBSD now implements EDNS0 support, which will be
necessary when working with IPv6 transport-ready resolvers/DNS servers.
[MERGED]

The rfork_thread(3) library call has been added as a helper function to
rfork(2). Using this function should avoid the need to implement complex
stack swap code. [MERGED]

The -v option to rm(1) now displays the entire pathname of a file being
removed.

route(8) is now more verbose when changing indirect routes, in the case
of a gateway route that is the same route as the one being modified.
[MERGED]

route(8) now uses host/bits syntax instead of net/bits syntax, for
compatibility with netstat(1). [MERGED]

route(8) can now create ``proxy only'' published ARP entries. [MERGED]

The route(8) add command now supports the -ifp and -ifa modifiers.
[MERGED]

rpcbind(8) has replaced portmap(8).

rpcgen(1) now uses /usr/bin/cpp (as on NetBSD), not /usr/libexec/cpp.

rpc.lockd(8) has been imported from NetBSD. This daemon provides support
for servicing client NFS locks.

The performance of the ELF dynamic linker rtld(1) has been improved.
[MERGED]

RSA Security has waived all patent rights to the RSA algorithm. As a
result, the native OpenSSL implementation of the RSA algorithm is now
activated by default, and the security/rsaref port and the librsaUSA and
librsaINTL libraries are no longer required for USA and non-USA
residents respectively. [MERGED]

rtld(1) will now print the names of all objects that cause each object
to be loaded, if the LD_TRACE_LOADED_OBJECTS_ALL environment variable is
defined.

savecore(8) now supports a -k option to prevent clearing a crash dump
after saving it. It also attempts to avoid writing large stretches of
zeros to crash dump files to save space and time. [MERGED]

savecore(8) now works correctly on machines with 2 GB or more of RAM.
[MERGED]

sed(1) now takes a -E option for extended regular expression support.
[MERGED]

send-pr(1) now takes a -a option to include a file into the Fix: section
of a problem report. [MERGED]

The setfacl(1) and getfacl(1) commands have been added to manage
filesystem Access Control Lists.

setproctitle(3) has been moved from libutil to libc. [MERGED]

sh(1) now implements test as a built-in command for improved efficiency.
[MERGED]

sh(1) no longer implements printf as a built-in command because it was
considered less valuable compared to the other built-in commands (this
functionality is, of course, still available through the printf(1)
executable).

sockstat(1) now has -c and -l flags for listing connected and listening
sockets, respectively. [MERGED]

split(1) now has the ability to split a file longer than 2GB. [MERGED]

In preparation for meeting SUSv2/POSIX <sys/select.h> requirements,
struct selinfo and related functions have been moved to <sys/selinfo.h>.

The strnstr(3) and strcasestr(3) variants of strstr(3) have been
implemented. [MERGED]

stty(1) now has support for an erase2 control character, so that, for
example, both the Delete and Backspace keys can be used to erase
characters. [MERGED]

style.perl(7), a style guide for Perl code in the FreeBSD base system,
has been added. [MERGED]

su(1) now uses PAM for authentication.

Boot-time syscons(4) configuration was moved to a machine-independent
/etc/rc.syscons. [MERGED]

sysctl(8) now supports a -N option to print out variable names only.
[MERGED]

sysctl(8) has replaced the -A and -X options with -ao and -ax
respectively; the former options are now deprecated. The -w option is
deprecated as well; it is not needed to determine the user's intentions.
[MERGED]

sysctl(8) now supports a -e option to separate variable names and values
by = rather than :. This feature is useful for producing output that can
be fed back to sysctl(8). [MERGED]

sysinstall(8) now properly preserves /etc/mail during a binary upgrade.
[MERGED]

sysinstall(8) now uses some more intuitive defaults thanks to some new
dialog support functions. [MERGED]

The default root partition in sysinstall(8) is now 100MB on the i386 and
120MB on the Alpha.

sysinstall(8) now lives in /usr/sbin, which simplifies the installation
process. The sysinstall(8) manpage is also installed in a more
consistent fashion now.

sysinstall(8) now has the ability to load KLDs as a part of the
installation. [MERGED]

When run from the installation media, sysinstall(8) will automatically
load any device drivers found in the /stand/modules directory of the
mfsroot floppy or filesystem image. Note that any drivers so loaded will
not appear in the kernel's boot messages; the sysinstall(8) debugging
screen will provide additional information. [MERGED]

sysinstall(8) now enables Soft Updates by default on all filesystems it
creates, except for the root filesystem. [MERGED]

sysinstall(8) has received updates for its ``auto'' partitioning mode
which provide more reasonable defaults for the sizes of partitions that
are created; auto-sized partitions can now also recover the space that
becomes available when other partitions are deleted. [MERGED]

syslogd(8) can take a -n option to disable DNS queries for every
request. [MERGED]

syslogd(8) now supports a LOG_CONSOLE facility (disabled by default),
which can be used to log /dev/console output. [MERGED]

syslogd(8) now has the ability to bind to a specific address (as opposed
to using every available one) via the -b option. [MERGED]

syslogd(8) now accepts a -c flag to disable repeated line compression.
[MERGED]

tail(1) now has the ability to work on files longer than 2GB. [MERGED]

tar(1) now supports the TAR_RSH variable, principally to enable the use
of ssh(1) as a transport. [MERGED]

telnet(1) now does autologin and encryption by default; a new -y option
turns off encryption.

telnet(1) now supports a -u flag to allow connections to UNIX-domain
(AF_UNIX) sockets. [MERGED]

tftpd(8) now takes the -c and -C options, which allow the server to
chroot(2) based on the IP address of the connecting client. tftp(1) and
tftpd(8) can now transfer files larger than 65535 blocks. [MERGED]

tftpd(8) now supports RFC 2349 (TFTP Timeout Interval and Transfer Size
Options); this feature is required by some firmware like EFI boot
managers (at least on HP i2000 Itanium servers) in order to boot an
image using TFTP.

A version of Transport Independent RPC (TI-RPC) has been imported.

tmpnam(3) will now use the TMPDIR environment variable, if set, to
specify the location of temporary files. [MERGED]

tip(1) has been updated from OpenBSD, and has the ability to act as a
cu(1) substitute.

top(1) will now use the full width of its tty.

touch(1) now takes a -h option to operate on a symbolic link, rather
than what the link points to.

The truncate(1) utility, which truncates or extends the length of files,
has been added. [MERGED]

Ukrainian language support has been added to the FreeBSD console.
[MERGED]

UUCP has been removed from the base system. It can be found in the Ports
Collection, in net/freebsd-uucp.

units(1) has received some updates and bugfixes. [MERGED]

usbdevs(8) now supports a -d flag to show the device driver associated
with each device.

uudecode(1) now accepts a -o option to set its output file.

vidcontrol(1) now accepts a -g parameter to select custom text geometry
in the VESA_800x600 raster text mode. [MERGED]

vidcontrol(1) now allows the user to omit the font size specification
when loading a font, and has some better error-handling. [MERGED]

vidcontrol(1) now supports a -p option to take a snapshot of a
syscons(4) video buffer. These snapshots can be manipulated by the
graphics/scr2png utility in the Ports Collection. [MERGED]

vidcontrol(1) now supports a -C option to clear the history buffer for a
given tty, as well as a -h option to set the size of the history buffer.
[MERGED]

The default stripe size in vinum(8) has been changed from 256KB to
279KB, to spread out superblocks more evenly between stripes.

wall(1) now supports a -g flag to write a message to all users of a
given group. [MERGED]

watch(8) now takes a -f option to specify a snp(4) device to use.
[MERGED]

which(1) is now a C program, rather than a Perl script.

whois(1) now directs queries for IP addresses to ARIN. If a query to
ARIN references APNIC or RIPE, the appropriate server will also be
queried, provided that the -Q option is not specified. [MERGED]

whois(1) supports a -c option to specify a country code to help direct
queries towards a particular whois server. [MERGED]

xargs(1) now supports a -J replstr option that allows the user to tell
xargs(1) to insert the data read from standard input at a specific point
in the command line arguments rather than at the end. [MERGED]

The compiler chain now uses the FSF-supplied C/C++ runtime
initialization code. This change brings about better compatibility with
code generated from the various egcs and gcc ports, as well as the stock
public FSF source. [MERGED]

The threads library has gained some signal handling changes, bug fixes,
and performance enhancements (including zero system call thread
switching). gdb(1) thread support has been updated to match these
changes. [MERGED]

Significant additions have been made to internationalization support;
FreeBSD now has complete locale support for the LC_MONETARY, LC_NUMERIC,
and LC_MESSAGES categories. A number of applications have been updated
to take advantage of this support.

Locale names have been changed to improve compatibility with the names
used by X11R6, as well as a number of other UNIX versions. As an
example, the en_US.ISO_8859-1 locale name has been changed to
en_US.ISO8859-1. Entries in /etc/locale.alias provide backward
compatibility. [MERGED]

/usr/src/share/examples/BSD_daemon/ now contains a scalable Beastie
graphic. [MERGED]

As part of an ongoing process, many manual pages were improved, both in
terms of their formatting markup and in their content. [MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.1 Contributed Software

am-utils has been updated to 6.0.7.

awk from Bell Labs (variously known as ``BWK awk'' or ``The One True
AWK'') has been imported. It is available as awk on the sparc64
architecture, and nawk on other architectures.

bc has been updated from 1.04 to 1.06. [MERGED]

The ISC library from the BIND distribution is now built as libisc.
[MERGED]

BIND is now built with the NOADDITIONAL flag, which causes named(8) to
operate in a more consistent fashion for certain common
misconfigurations. [MERGED]

BIND has been updated to 8.3.1-REL. [MERGED]

Binutils has been updated to 2.12.0.

bzip2 1.0.2 has been imported; this brings the bzip2(1) program and the
libbz2 library to the base system. [MERGED]

The ee(1) Easy Editor has been updated to 1.4.2. [MERGED]

file has been updated to 3.37.

gcc has been updated to 2.95.3. [MERGED]

gcc(1) now uses a unified libgcc rather than a separate one for threaded
and non-threaded programs. /usr/lib/libgcc_r.a can be removed. [MERGED]

gcc(1) now supports the environment variable GCC_OPTIONS, which can hold
a set of default options for GCC. [MERGED]

GNATS has been updated to 3.113. [MERGED]

GNU awk has been updated to 3.1.0. It is available as gawk on the
sparc64 architecture, and as awk on other architectures.

gperf has been updated to 2.7.2.

groff and its related utilities have been updated to FSF version 1.17.2.
This import brings in a new mdoc(7) macro package (sometimes referred to
as mdocNG), which removes many of the limitations of its predecessor.
[MERGED]

Heimdal has been updated to 0.3f.

The version of IPFilter provided with FreeBSD now includes the ipfs(8)
program, which allows state information created for NAT entries and
stateful rules to be saved to disk and restored after a reboot.
Boot-time configuration of these features is supported by rc.conf(5).
[MERGED]

The ISC DHCP client has been updated to 3.0.1RC6.

Kerberos IV has been updated to 1.0.5. [MERGED]

The more(1) command has been replaced by less(1), although it can still
be run as more. [MERGED] Version 371 of less has been imported.

libpcap has been updated to 0.6.2. [MERGED]

libreadline has been updated to 4.2.

libz has been updated to 1.1.4.

lint has been updated to snapshot of NetBSD lint(1) as of 3 March 2002.

lukemftp (the FTP client from NetBSD) has replaced the FreeBSD ftp(1)
program. Among its new features are more automation methods, better
standards compliance, transfer rate throttling, and a customizable
command-line prompt. Some environment variables and command-line
arguments have changed.

The FTP daemon from NetBSD, otherwise known as lukemftpd, has been
imported and is available as lukemftpd(8).

ncurses has been updated to 5.2-20010512.

The NTP suite of programs has been updated to 4.1.0. [MERGED]

OpenPAM (``Centaury'' release) has been imported, replacing Linux-PAM.

The OPIE one-time-password suite has been updated to 2.32. [MERGED] It
has completely replaced the functionality of S/Key.

Perl has been updated to version 5.6.0.

routed(8) has been updated to version 2.22. [MERGED]

Version 1.4.3 of the smbfs userland utilities have been imported.
[MERGED]

tcpdump has been updated to 3.6.3. [MERGED]

The csh(1) shell has been replaced by tcsh(1), although it can still be
run as csh. tcsh has been updated to version 6.11. [MERGED]

The contributed version of tcp_wrappers now includes the tcpd(8) helper
daemon. While not strictly necessary in a standard FreeBSD installation
(because inetd(8) already incorporates this functionality), this may be
useful for inetd(8) replacements such as xinetd.

top has been updated to version 3.5b12.

traceroute(8) now takes its default maximum TTL value from the
net.inet.ip.ttl sysctl variable. [MERGED]

The timezone database has been updated to the tzdata2001d release.
[MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.1.1 CVS

cvs has been updated to 1.11.1p1. [MERGED]

The default value for cvs(1)'s CVS_RSH variable is now ssh, rather than
rsh. [MERGED]

cvs(1) now supports a -T option to update a sandbox's CVS/Template file
from the repository. [MERGED]

cvs(1) diff now supports the -j option to perform differences against a
revision relative to a branch tag. [MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.1.2 CVSup

CVSup, a frequently used utility in the FreeBSD Ports Collection, was
formerly installable using several ports and packages. The net/cvsup-bin
and net/cvsupd-bin ports/packages are no longer necessary or available;
the net/cvsup port should be used instead. [MERGED]

CVSup has been updated to 16.1_3, which is available in the FreeBSD
Ports Collection as net/cvsup. This update fixes a long-standing (but
only recently encountered) bug which affects the timestamps on all files
after Sun Sep 9 01:46:40 UTC 2001 (1,000,000,000 seconds after the UNIX
epoch). [MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.1.3 KAME

The IPv6 stack is now based on a snapshot based on the KAME Project's
IPv6 snapshot as of 28 May, 2001. Most of the items listed in this
section are a result of this import. Section 2.1.9.3 lists kernel
updates to the KAME IPv6 stack. [MERGED]

faithd(8) now supports a configuration file for access control. [MERGED]

ifconfig(8) can now perform the functions of gifconfig(8). [MERGED]

ifconfig(8) can now perform the functions of prefix(8). prefix(8) is now
a shell script for partial backwards compatibility. [MERGED]

ndp(8) now implements garbage collection for stale NDP entries, as
described in RFC 2461 (Neighbor Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6)).
[MERGED]

pim6dd(8) and pim6sd(8) have been removed due to restrictive licensing
conditions. These programs are available in the ports collection as
net/pim6dd and net/pim6sd. [MERGED]

route6d(8) now supports an -n flag to avoid updating the kernel
forwarding table. [MERGED]

The -R (router renumbering) option to rtadvd(8) is currently ignored.
[MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.1.4 OpenSSH

OpenSSH has been updated to 2.9, which provides support for the SSH2
protocol (now the default) and DSA keys. ssh-add(1) and ssh-agent(1) can
now handle DSA keys, with support for authentication forwarding. OpenSSH
users in the USA no longer need to rely on the restrictively-licensed
RSAREF toolkit which is required to handle RSA keys. Among other new
features: A client and server for sftp has been added. scp(1) can now
handle files larger than 2 GBytes. A limit on the number of outstanding,
unauthenticated connections in sshd(8) has been added. Support has been
added for the Rijndael encryption algorithm. Rekeying of existing
sessions is now supported, and an experimental SOCKS4 proxy has been
added to ssh(1).

OpenSSH can now authenticate using OPIE passwords in SSH1 mode. Support
is not yet available in SSH2 mode. [MERGED]

PAM support for OpenSSH has been added.

A long-standing bug in OpenSSH, which sometimes resulted in a dropped
session when an X11-forwarded client was closed, was fixed.

Kerberos compatibility has been added to OpenSSH. [MERGED]

OpenSSH has been modified to be more resistant to traffic analysis by
requiring that ``non-echoed'' characters are still echoed back in a null
packet, as well as by padding passwords sent so as not to hint at
password lengths. [MERGED]

sshd(8) is now enabled by default on new installs. [MERGED]

sshd(8) X11Forwarding is now turned on by default on the server (any
risk is to the client, where it is already disabled by default).
[MERGED]

In /etc/ssh/sshd_config, the ConnectionsPerPeriod parameter has been
deprecated in favor of MaxStartups. [MERGED]

OpenSSH now has a VersionAddendum configuration setting for sshd(8) to
allow changing the part of the OpenSSH version string after the main
version number.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.1.5 OpenSSL

OpenSSL has been updated to 0.9.6c.

OpenSSL now has support for machine-dependent ASM optimizations,
activated by the new MACHINE_CPU and/or CPUTYPE make.conf variables.
[MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.1.6 sendmail

sendmail has been updated from version 8.9.3 to version 8.12.2.
Important changes include: sendmail(8) is no longer installed as a
set-user-ID root binary (now set-group-ID smmsp); new default file
locations (see /usr/src/contrib/sendmail/cf/README); newaliases(1) is
limited to root and trusted users; STARTTLS encryption; and the MSA port
(587) is turned on by default. See
/usr/src/contrib/sendmail/RELEASE_NOTES for more information. [MERGED]

mail.local(8) is no longer installed as a set-user-ID binary. If you are
using a /etc/mail/sendmail.cf from the default sendmail.cf included with
FreeBSD any time after 3.1.0, you are fine. If you are using a
hand-configured sendmail.cf and mail.local for delivery, check to make
sure the F=S flag is set on the Mlocal line. Those with .mc files who
need to add the flag can do so by adding the following line to their .mc
file and regenerating the sendmail.cf file:

        MODIFY_MAILER_FLAGS(`LOCAL',`+S')dnl

Note that FEATURE(`local_lmtp') already does this. [MERGED]

The default /etc/mail/sendmail.cf disables the SMTP EXPN and VRFY
commands. [MERGED]

vacation(1) has been updated to use the version included with sendmail.
[MERGED]

The sendmail configuration building tools are installed in
/usr/share/sendmail/cf/. [MERGED]

New make.conf options: SENDMAIL_MC and SENDMAIL_ADDITIONAL_MC. See
/usr/share/examples/etc/make.conf for more information. [MERGED]

/etc/mail/Makefile now supports: the new SENDMAIL_MC make.conf option;
the ability to build .cf files from .mc files; generalized map
rebuilding; rebuilding the aliases file; and the ability to stop, start,
and restart sendmail. [MERGED]

The smmsp and mailnull users have been added to /etc/master.passwd. In
the absence of a confDEF_USER_ID setting, by default, sendmail will use
the mailnull user for extra security. Previously, if the mailnull user
did not exist, the daemon user was used. This change may generate some
permissions issues when mailing to files or to programs (such as
mail/majordomo). [MERGED] The previous behavior can be restored by
adding the following line to a system's *.mc configuration file:

        define(`confDEF_USER_ID', `daemon')

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

2.3.2 Ports/Packages Collection

BSDPAN, a collection of modules that provides tighter integration of
Perl into the FreeBSD Ports Collection, has been added.

pkg_create(1) and pkg_add(1) can now work with packages that have been
compressed using bzip2(1). pkg_add(1) will use the PACKAGEROOT
environment variable to determine a mirror site for new packages.
[MERGED]

pkg_create(1) now records dependencies in dependency order rather than
in the order specified on the command line. This improves the
functioning of pkg_add -r. [MERGED]

pkg_create(1) now supports a -b to create a package file from a
locally-installed package. [MERGED]

When requested to delete multiple packages, pkg_delete(1) will now
attempt to remove them in dependency order rather than the order
specified on the command line. [MERGED]

pkg_delete(1) now can perform glob/regexp matching of package names. In
addition, it supports a -a option for removing all packages and a -i
option for rm(1)-style interactive confirmation. [MERGED]

pkg_delete(1) now supports a -r option for recursive package removal.
[MERGED]

pkg_info(1) now supports globbing against names of installed packages.
The -G option disables this behavior, and the -x option causes regular
expression matching instead of shell globbing. [MERGED]

pkg_info(1) can now accept a -g flag for verifying an installed package
against its recorded checksums (to see if it's been modified
post-installation). Naturally, this mechanism is only as secure as the
contents of /var/db/pkg if it's to be used for auditing purposes.
[MERGED]

pkg_sign(1) and pkg_check(1) have been added to digitally sign and
verify the signatures on binary package files. [MERGED]

pkg_update(1), a utility to update installed packages and update their
dependencies, has been added. [MERGED]

pkg_version(1) now has a version number comparison routine that
corresponds to the Porters Handbook. It also has a -t option for testing
address comparisons. [MERGED]

pkg_version(1) now takes a -s flag to limit its operation to
ports/packages matching a given string. [MERGED]

Version numbers of installed packages have a new (backward-compatible)
syntax, which supports the PORTREVISION and PORTEPOCH variables in Ports
Collection Makefiles. These changes help keep track of changes in the
ports collection entries such as security patches or FreeBSD-specific
updates, which aren't reflected in the original, third-party software
distributions. pkg_version(1) can now compare these new-style version
numbers. [MERGED]

To improve performance and disk utilization, the ``ports skeletons'' in
the FreeBSD Ports Collection have been restructured. Installed ports and
packages should not be affected. [MERGED]

All packages and ports now contain an ``origin'' directive, which makes
it easier for programs such as pkg_version(1) to determine the directory
from which a package was built. [MERGED]

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

If you're upgrading from a previous release of FreeBSD, you generally
will have three options:

-   Using the binary upgrade option of sysinstall(8). This option is
    perhaps the quickest, although it presumes that your installation of
    FreeBSD uses no special compilation options.

-   Performing a complete reinstall of FreeBSD. Technically, this is not
    an upgrading method, and in any case is usually less convenient than
    a binary upgrade, in that it requires you to manually backup and
    restore the contents of /etc. However, it may be useful in cases
    where you want (or need) to change the partitioning of your disks.

-   From source code in /usr/src. This route is more flexible, but
    requires more disk space, time, and more technical expertise.
    Upgrading from very old versions of FreeBSD may be problematic; in
    cases like this, it is usually more effective to perform a binary
    upgrade or a complete reinstall.

Please read the INSTALL.TXT file for more information, preferably before
beginning an upgrade. If you are upgrading from source, please be sure
to read /usr/src/UPDATING as well.

Finally, if you want to use one of various means to track the -STABLE or
-CURRENT branches of FreeBSD, please be sure to consult the ``-CURRENT
vs. -STABLE'' section of the FreeBSD Handbook.

  Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should, of course, only be attempted
  after backing up all data and configuration files.

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://current.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT should subscribe to the
<current@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.
