[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 5.2-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 The FreeBSD Documentation
Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v 1.67
2004/03/30 17:43:26 kensmith Exp $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of Wind River Systems, Inc. This is
expected to change soon.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the ``™''
or the ``®'' symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 5.2-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release or too late in
  the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
  documentation. This information includes security advisories, as well
  as news relating to the software or documentation that could affect
  its operation or usability. An up-to-date version of this document
  should always be consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This document also contains errata for FreeBSD 5.2.1-RELEASE, a
  ``point release'' made about one month after FreeBSD 5.2-RELEASE.
  Unless otherwise noted, all errata items in this document apply to
  both 5.2-RELEASE and 5.2.1-RELEASE.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 5.2-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 5.3-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains ``late-breaking news'' about FreeBSD
5.2-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the ``current errata'' for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://www.FreeBSD.org/security/ or
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Security Advisories

(30 Jan 2004, updated 28 Feb 2004) A bug in mksnap_ffs(8) causes the
creation of a filesystem snapshot to reset the flags on the filesystem
to their default values. The possible consequences depend on local
usage, but can include disabling extended access control lists or
enabling the use of setuid executables stored on an untrusted
filesystem. This bug also affects the dump(8) -L option, which uses
mksnap_ffs(8). Note that mksnap_ffs(8) is normally only available to the
superuser and members of the operator group. This bug has been fixed on
the FreeBSD 5.2-RELEASE security fix branch and in FreeBSD
5.2.1-RELEASE. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-04:01.

(8 Feb 2004, updated 28 Feb 2004) A bug with the System V Shared Memory
interface (specifically the shmat(2) system call) can cause a shared
memory segment to reference unallocated kernel memory. In turn, this can
permit a local attacker to gain unauthorized access to parts of kernel
memory, possibly resulting in disclosure of sensitive information,
bypass of access control mechanisms, or privilege escalation. This bug
has been fixed on the FreeBSD 5.2-RELEASE security fix branch and in
FreeBSD 5.2.1-RELEASE. More details, including bugfix and workaround
information, can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:02.

(28 Feb 2004) It is possible, under some circumstances, for a processor
with superuser privileges inside a jail(8) environment to change its
root directory to a different jail, giving it read and write access to
the files and directories within. This vulnerability has been closed on
the FreeBSD 5.2-RELEASE security fix branch and in FreeBSD
5.2.1-RELEASE. Information on the bug fix can be found in security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:03.

(4 Mar 2004) It is possible for a remote attacker to conduct a
low-bandwidth denial-of-service attack against a machine providing
TCP-based services, filling up the target's memory buffers and
potentially leading to a system crash. This vulnerability has been
addressed on the FreeBSD 5.2-RELEASE security fix branch, but is present
in both FreeBSD 5.2-RELEASE and 5.2.1-RELEASE. Security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-04:04 contains more details, as well as information on
patching existing systems.

(17 Mar 2004) By performing a specially crafted SSL/TLS handshake with
an application that uses OpenSSL a null pointer may be dereferenced.
This may in turn cause the application to crash, resulting in a denial
of service attack. For more information see the Security Advisory
FreeBSD-SA-04:05 which contains more details and instructions on how to
patch existing systems.

(29 Mar 2004) A local attacker may take advantage of a programming error
in the handling of certain IPv6 socket options in the setsockopt(2)
system call to read portions of kernel memory without proper
authorization. This may result in disclosure of sensitive data, or
potentially cause a panic. See Security Advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:06 for a
more detailed description and instructions on how to patch existing
systems.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Open Issues

(9 Jan 2004) Due to a change in cpp(1) behavior, the login screen for
xdm(1) is in black and white, even on systems with color displays. As a
workaround, update to a newer version of the x11/XFree86-4-clients
port/package.

(9 Jan 2004) There remain some residual problems with ACPI. In some
cases, systems may behave erratically, or hang at boot time. As a
workaround, disable ACPI, using the ``safe mode'' option of the
bootloader or using the hint.acpi.0.disabled kernel environment
variable. These problems are being investigated. For problems that have
not already been reported (check the mailing list archives before
posting), sending the output of dmesg(8) and acpidump(8) to the
FreeBSD-CURRENT mailing list may help diagnose the problem.

(9 Jan 2004, updated 28 Feb 2004) In some cases, ATA devices may behave
erratically, particularly SATA devices. Reported symptoms include
command timeouts or missing interrupts. These problems appear to be
timing-dependent, making them rather difficult to isolate. Workarounds
include:

-   Turn off ATA DMA using the ``safe mode'' option of the bootloader or
    the hw.ata.ata_dma sysctl variable.

-   Use the host's BIOS setup options to put the ATA controller in its
    ``legacy mode'', if available.

-   Disable ACPI, for example using the ``safe mode'' option of the
    bootloader or using the hint.acpi.0.disabled kernel environment
    variable.

Some of these problems were addressed in FreeBSD 5.2.1-RELEASE with the
import of a newer ata(4) from 5.2-CURRENT.

(9 Jan 2004) Installing over NFS when using the install floppies
requires that the nfsclient.ko module be manually loaded from the third
floppy disk. This can be done by following the prompts when
sysinstall(8) launches to load a driver off of the third floppy disk.

(9 Jan 2004) The use of multiple vchans (virtual audio channels with
dynamic mixing in software) in the pcm(4) driver has been known to cause
some instability.

(10 Jan 2004) Although APIC interrupt routing seems to work correctly on
many systems, on some others (such as some laptops) it can cause various
errors, such as ata(4) errors or hangs when starting or exiting X11. For
these situations, it may be advisable to disable APIC routing, using the
``safe mode'' of the bootloader or the hint.apic.0.disabled loader
tunable. Note that disabling APIC is not compatible with SMP systems.

(10 Jan 2004, updated 28 Feb 2004) The NFSv4 client may panic when
attempting an NFSv4 operation against an NFSv3/NFSv2-only server. This
problem has been fixed with revision 1.4 of src/sys/rpc/rpcclnt.c in
FreeBSD 5.2-CURRENT. It was also fixed in FreeBSD 5.2.1-RELEASE.

(11 Jan 2004, updated 28 Feb 2004) Some problems have been encountered
when using third-party NSS modules, such as nss_ldap, and groups with
large membership lists. These have been fixed with revision 1.2 of
src/include/nss.h and revision 1.2 of src/lib/libc/net/nss_compat.c in
FreeBSD 5.2-CURRENT; this fix was backported to FreeBSD 5.2.1-RELEASE.

(13 Jan 2004) The FreeBSD 5.2-CURRENT release notes incorrectly stated
that GCC was a post-release GCC 3.3.3 snapshot. They should have stated
that GCC was a pre-release GCC 3.3.3 snapshot.

(13 Jan 2004, updated 28 Feb 2004) The sysutils/kdeadmin3 port/package
has a bug in the KUser component that can cause deletion of the root
user from the system password file. Users are strongly urged to upgrade
to version 3.1.4_1 of this port/package. The package set included with
FreeBSD 5.2.1-RELEASE contains the fixed version of this package.

(21 Jan 2004, updated 28 Feb 2004) Some bugs in the IPsec implementation
imported from the KAME Project can result in memory objects being freed
before all references to them were removed. Reported symptoms include
erratic behavior or kernel panics after flushing the Security Policy
Database (SPD). Some of these problems have been fixed in FreeBSD
5.2-CURRENT in rev. 1.31 of src/sys/netinet6/ipsec.c, rev. 1.136 of
src/sys/netinet/in_pcb.c, and revs. 1.63 and 1.64 of
src/sys/netkey/key.c. These bugfixes were backported to FreeBSD
5.2.1-RELEASE. More information about these problems has been posted to
the FreeBSD-CURRENT mailing list, in particular the thread entitled
``[PATCH] IPSec fixes''.

(28 Feb 2004) The edition of the Porters Handbook included with FreeBSD
5.2.1-RELEASE contained an incorrect value for 5.2.1-RELEASE's
__FreeBSD_version. The correct value is 502010.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Late-Breaking News

(10 Jan 2004, updated 28 Feb 2004) The TCP implementation in FreeBSD now
includes protection against a certain class of TCP MSS resource
exhaustion attacks, in the form of limits on the size and rate of TCP
segments. The first limit sets the minimum allowed maximum TCP segment
size, and is controlled by the net.inet.tcp.minmss sysctl variable (the
default value is 216 bytes). The second limit is set by the
net.inet.tcp.minmssoverload variable, and controls the maximum rate of
connections whose average segment size is less than net.inet.tcp.minmss.
Connections exceeding this packet rate are reset and dropped. Because
this feature was added late in the 5.2-RELEASE release cycle, connection
rate limiting is disabled by default, but can be enabled manually by
assigning a non-zero value to net.inet.tcp.minmssoverload. This feature
was added to FreeBSD 5.2-RELEASE too late for inclusion in its release
notes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://snapshots.jp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT should subscribe to the
<current@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
