[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Freshports: SQL Injection Attack and Help Request

Links:
FreshPorts URL: freshports.org
FreshPorts blog URL: https://news.freshports.org/

Contact: Dan Langille <dvl@FreeBSD.org>

FreshPorts and FreshSource have reported upon FreeBSD commits for 20
years. They cover all commits, not just ports.

FreshPorts tracks the commits and extracts data from the port Makefiles
to create a database of information useful to both port maintainers and
port users.

For example, https://www.freshports.org/security/acme.sh/ shows the
history of the security/acme.sh port, back to its creation in May 2017.
Also available are dependencies, flavors, configuration options, and
available packages. All of this is useful for both users and developers
of ports.

SQL Injection Attack

In March, an SQL injection attack was noticed and the website was
patched. Notices were sent out via our Twitter account, our status page,
and a notice on the top of each page of the website. The immediate
attack vector was shutdown and soon patched. Additional preventative
patches were added across the website. Everything we know about has been
fixed. Users were notified and advised to change their passwords.

Details at:

-   https://news.freshports.org/2023/03/24/sql-inejection-issues-fixed/

-   https://news.freshports.org/2023/03/24/freshsource-code-fixes/

Help Needed

It has been over 22 years since FreshPorts started. Others must take
over eventually. I’d like to start that process now. There are several
aspects to FreshPorts:

-   FreeBSD admin (updating the OS and packages)

-   front end code (website - mostly PHP)

-   back end code (commit processing - Perl, Python, shell)

-   database design (PostgreSQL).

The database does not change very often and requires little maintenance
compared to the applications and OS. The website pretty much runs
itself. From time to time, a change to the FreeBSD ports infrastructure
breaks something or requires a modification, but there is rarely any
urgency to fix that. This is not a huge time commitment. There is a lot
of learning. While not a complex application, FreshPorts is also not
trivial.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: April 14, 2023 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
