[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/powerpc 6.3-RELEASE Hardware Notes

The FreeBSD Documentation Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 The FreeBSD
Documentation Project

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 Supported Processors and Motherboards

3 Supported Devices

3.1 Disk Controllers

3.2 Ethernet Interfaces

3.3 Token Ring Interfaces

3.4 FDDI Interfaces

3.5 ATM Interfaces

3.6 Wireless Network Interfaces

3.7 Miscellaneous Networks

3.8 ISDN Interfaces

3.9 Serial Interfaces

3.10 Sound Devices

3.11 Camera and Video Capture Devices

3.12 USB Devices

3.13 IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Devices

3.14 Bluetooth Devices

3.15 Cryptographic Accelerators

3.16 Miscellaneous

  This is a preliminary document. It is incomplete, and in need of
  additional content.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This document contains the hardware compatibility notes for FreeBSD
6.3-RELEASE on the PowerPC hardware platform (also referred to as
FreeBSD/powerpc 6.3-RELEASE). It lists devices known to work on this
platform, as well as some notes on boot-time kernel customization that
may be useful when attempting to configure support for new devices.

  Note: This document includes information specific to the PowerPC
  hardware platform. Versions of the hardware compatibility notes for
  other architectures will differ in some details.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Supported Processors and Motherboards

The information for this paragraph has yet to be compiled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Supported Devices

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/hardware/common/dev.sgml,v
1.282.2.17 2007/09/13 16:25:43 brueffer Exp $

This section describes the devices currently known to be supported by
with FreeBSD on the PowerPC platform. Other configurations may also
work, but simply have not been tested yet. Feedback, updates, and
corrections to this list are encouraged.

Where possible, the drivers applicable to each device or class of
devices is listed. If the driver in question has a manual page in the
FreeBSD base distribution (most should), it is referenced here.
Information on specific models of supported devices, controllers, etc.
can be found in the manual pages.

  Note: The device lists in this document are being generated
  automatically from FreeBSD manual pages. This means that some devices,
  which are supported by multiple drivers, may appear multiple times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1 Disk Controllers

The ahc(4) driver supports the following SCSI host adapter chips and
SCSI controller cards:

-   Adaptec AIC7770 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7850 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7860 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7870 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7880 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7890 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7891 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7892 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7895 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7896 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7897 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec AIC7899 host adapter chip

-   Adaptec 274X(W)

-   Adaptec 274X(T)

-   Adaptec 284X

-   Adaptec 2910

-   Adaptec 2915

-   Adaptec 2920

-   Adaptec 2930C

-   Adaptec 2930U2

-   Adaptec 2940

-   Adaptec 2940J

-   Adaptec 2940N

-   Adaptec 2940U

-   Adaptec 2940AU

-   Adaptec 2940UW

-   Adaptec 2940UW Dual

-   Adaptec 2940UW Pro

-   Adaptec 2940U2W

-   Adaptec 2940U2B

-   Adaptec 2950U2W

-   Adaptec 2950U2B

-   Adaptec 19160B

-   Adaptec 29160B

-   Adaptec 29160N

-   Adaptec 3940

-   Adaptec 3940U

-   Adaptec 3940AU

-   Adaptec 3940UW

-   Adaptec 3940AUW

-   Adaptec 3940U2W

-   Adaptec 3950U2

-   Adaptec 3960

-   Adaptec 39160

-   Adaptec 3985

-   Adaptec 4944UW

-   NEC PC-9821Xt13 (PC-98)

-   NEC RvII26 (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B02L/B09 (PC-98)

-   NEC SV-98/2-B03 (PC-98)

-   Many motherboards with on-board SCSI support

Controllers supported by the amr(4) driver include:

-   MegaRAID SATA 150-4

-   MegaRAID SATA 150-6

-   MegaRAID SATA 300-4X

-   MegaRAID SATA 300-8X

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-1E

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-2E

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-4E

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-0X

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-2X

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-4X

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-0

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-1

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-2

-   MegaRAID SCSI 320-4

-   MegaRAID Series 418

-   MegaRAID i4 133 RAID

-   MegaRAID Elite 1500 (Series 467)

-   MegaRAID Elite 1600 (Series 493)

-   MegaRAID Elite 1650 (Series 4xx)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1200 (Series 428)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1300 (Series 434)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1400 (Series 438)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1500 (Series 467)

-   MegaRAID Enterprise 1600 (Series 471)

-   MegaRAID Express 100 (Series 466WS)

-   MegaRAID Express 200 (Series 466)

-   MegaRAID Express 300 (Series 490)

-   MegaRAID Express 500 (Series 475)

-   Dell PERC

-   Dell PERC 2/SC

-   Dell PERC 2/DC

-   Dell PERC 3/DCL

-   Dell PERC 3/QC

-   Dell PERC 4/DC

-   Dell PERC 4/IM

-   Dell PERC 4/SC

-   Dell PERC 4/Di

-   Dell PERC 4e/DC

-   Dell PERC 4e/Di

-   Dell PERC 4e/Si

-   Dell PERC 4ei

-   HP NetRAID-1/Si

-   HP NetRAID-3/Si (D4943A)

-   HP Embedded NetRAID

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCS16

-   Intel RAID Controller SRCU42X

Cards supported by the isp(4) driver include:

-   ISP1000

-   ISP1020

-   ISP1040

-   Qlogic 1240

-   Qlogic 1020

-   Qlogic 1040

-   Qlogic 1080

-   Qlogic 1280

-   Qlogic 12160

-   Qlogic 210X

-   Qlogic 220X

-   Qlogic 2300

-   Qlogic 2312

-   Qlogic 234X

-   Qlogic 2322

-   Qlogic 200

-   Qlogic 2422

-   Qlogic 2432

The following controllers are supported by the mpt(4) driver:

-   LSI Logic 53c1030, LSI Logic LSI2x320-X (Single and Dual Ultra320
    SCSI)

-   LSI Logic AS1064, LSI Logic AS1068

-   LSI Logic FC909 (1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC909A (Dual 1Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC919, LSI Logic 7102XP-LC (Single 2Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC929, LSI Logic FC929X, LSI Logic 7202XP-LC (Dual 2Gb/s
    Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC949X (Dual 4Gb/s Fibre Channel)

-   LSI Logic FC949ES (Dual 4Gb/s Fibre Channel PCI-Express)

The Ultra 320 SCSI controller chips supported by the mpt(4) driver can
be found onboard on many systems including:

-   Dell PowerEdge 1750 thru 2850

-   IBM eServer xSeries 335

These systems also contain Integrated Raid Mirroring and Integrated Raid
Mirroring Enhanced which this driver also supports. The SAS controller
chips are also present on many new AMD/Opteron based systems, like the
Sun 4100. Note that this controller can drive both SAS and SATA drives
or a mix of them at the same time. The Integrated Raid Mirroring
available for these controllers is poorly supported at best. The Fibre
Channel controller chipset are supported by a broad variety of speeds
and systems. The Apple Fibre Channel HBA is in fact the FC949ES card.
This driver also supports target mode for Fibre Channel cards. This
support may be enabled by setting the desired role of the core via the
LSI Logic firmware utility that establishes what roles the card can take
on - no separate compilation is required.

The sym(4) driver provides support for the following Symbios/LSI Logic
PCI SCSI controllers:

-   53C810

-   53C810A

-   53C815

-   53C825

-   53C825A

-   53C860

-   53C875

-   53C876

-   53C895

-   53C895A

-   53C896

-   53C897

-   53C1000

-   53C1000R

-   53C1010-33

-   53C1010-66

-   53C1510D

The SCSI controllers supported by sym(4) can be either embedded on a
motherboard, or on one of the following add-on boards:

-   ASUS SC-200, SC-896

-   Data Technology DTC3130 (all variants)

-   DawiControl DC2976UW

-   Diamond FirePort (all)

-   I-O DATA SC-UPCI (PC-98)

-   Logitec LHA-521UA (PC-98)

-   NCR cards (all)

-   Symbios cards (all)

-   Tekram DC390W, 390U, 390F, 390U2B, 390U2W, 390U3D, and 390U3W

-   Tyan S1365

With all supported SCSI controllers, full support is provided for
SCSI-I, SCSI-II, and SCSI-III peripherals, including hard disks, optical
disks, tape drives (including DAT, 8mm Exabyte, Mammoth, and DLT),
medium changers, processor target devices and CD-ROM drives. WORM
devices that support CD-ROM commands are supported for read-only access
by the CD-ROM drivers (such as cd(4)). WORM/CD-R/CD-RW writing support
is provided by cdrecord(1), which is a part of the sysutils/cdrtools
port in the Ports Collection.

The following CD-ROM type systems are supported at this time:

-   SCSI interface (also includes ProAudio Spectrum and SoundBlaster
    SCSI) (cd(4))

-   ATAPI IDE interface ( acd(4))

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2 Ethernet Interfaces

Adapters supported by the aue(4) driver include:

-   Abocom UFE1000, DSB650TX_NA

-   Accton USB320-EC, SpeedStream

-   ADMtek AN986, AN8511

-   Billionton USB100, USB100LP, USB100EL, USBE100

-   Corega Ether FEther USB-T, FEther USB-TX, FEther USB-TXS

-   D-Link DSB-650, DSB-650TX, DSB-650TX-PNA

-   Elecom LD-USBL/TX

-   Elsa Microlink USB2Ethernet

-   HP hn210e

-   I-O Data USB ETTX

-   Kingston KNU101TX

-   LinkSys USB10T adapters that contain the AN986 Pegasus chipset,
    USB10TA, USB10TX, USB100TX, USB100H1

-   MELCO LUA-TX, LUA2-TX

-   Netgear FA101

-   Planex UE-200TX

-   Sandberg USB to Network Link (model number 133-06)

-   Siemens Speedstream

-   SmartBridges smartNIC

-   SMC 2202USB

-   SOHOware NUB100

The axe(4) driver supports ASIX Electronics AX88172 based USB Ethernet
adapters including:

-   Buffalo (Melco Inc.) LUA-U2-KTX

-   D-Link DUB-E100, revision A

-   LinkSys USB200M

-   Netgear FA120

-   Sitecom LN-029

-   System TALKS Inc. SGC-X2UL

The cue(4) driver supports CATC USB-EL1210A based USB Ethernet adapters
including:

-   Belkin F5U011/F5U111

-   CATC Netmate

-   CATC Netmate II

-   SmartBridges SmartLink

The dc(4) driver provides support for the following chipsets:

-   DEC/Intel 21143

-   ADMtek AL981 Comet, AN985 Centaur, ADM9511 Centaur II and ADM9513
    Centaur II

-   ASIX Electronics AX88140A and AX88141

-   Conexant LANfinity RS7112 (miniPCI)

-   Davicom DM9009, DM9100, DM9102 and DM9102A

-   Lite-On 82c168 and 82c169 PNIC

-   Lite-On/Macronix 82c115 PNIC II

-   Macronix 98713, 98713A, 98715, 98715A, 98715AEC-C, 98725, 98727 and
    98732

-   Xircom X3201 (cardbus only)

The following NICs are known to work with the dc(4) driver at this time:

-   3Com OfficeConnect 10/100B (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Abocom FE2500

-   Accton EN1217 (98715A)

-   Accton EN2242 MiniPCI

-   Adico AE310TX (98715A)

-   Alfa Inc GFC2204 (ASIX AX88140A)

-   Built in 10Mbps only Ethernet on Compaq Presario 7900 series
    desktops (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in DE500-BA on DEC Alpha workstations (21143, non-MII)

-   Built in Sun DMFE 10/100 Mbps Ethernet on Sun Netra X1 and Sun Fire
    V100 (DM9102A, MII)

-   Built in Ethernet on LinkSys EtherFast 10/100 Instant GigaDrive
    (DM9102, MII)

-   CNet Pro110B (ASIX AX88140A)

-   CNet Pro120A (98715A or 98713A) and CNet Pro120B (98715)

-   Compex RL100-TX (98713 or 98713A)

-   D-Link DFE-570TX (21143, MII, quad port)

-   Digital DE500-BA 10/100 (21143, non-MII)

-   ELECOM Laneed LD-CBL/TXA (ADMtek AN985)

-   Hawking CB102 CardBus

-   IBM EtherJet Cardbus Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 Mobile Cardbus (versions that use the X3201 chipset)

-   Jaton XpressNet (Davicom DM9102)

-   Kingston KNE100TX (21143, MII)

-   Kingston KNE110TX (PNIC 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v2.0 (PNIC II 82c115)

-   LinkSys LNE100TX v4.0/4.1 (ADMtek AN985 Centaur-P)

-   Matrox FastNIC 10/100 (PNIC 82c168, 82c169)

-   Melco LGY-PCI-TXL

-   Microsoft MN-120 10/100 CardBus (ADMTek Centaur-C)

-   Microsoft MN-130 10/100 PCI (ADMTek Centaur-P)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A (98713A)

-   NDC SOHOware SFA110A Rev B4 (98715AEC-C)

-   NetGear FA310-TX Rev. D1, D2 or D3 (PNIC 82c169)

-   Netgear FA511

-   PlaneX FNW-3602-T (ADMtek AN985)

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 1233A-TX (ADMtek AN985)

-   SVEC PN102-TX (98713)

-   Xircom Cardbus Realport

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet 10/100

-   Xircom Cardbus Ethernet II 10/100

Adapters supported by the fxp(4) driver include:

-   Intel EtherExpress PRO/10

-   Intel InBusiness 10/100

-   Intel PRO/100B / EtherExpressPRO/100 B PCI Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100+ Management Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 VE Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 M Desktop Adapter

-   Intel PRO/100 S Desktop, Server and Dual-Port Server Adapters

-   Contec C-NET(PI)-100TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821Ra20, Rv20, Xv13, Xv20 internal 100Base-TX (PC-98)

-   NEC PC-9821X-B06 (PC-98)

-   Many on-board network interfaces on Intel motherboards

Chips supported by the gem(4) driver include:

-   Apple GMAC

-   Sun ERI 10/100 Mbps Ethernet

-   Sun GEM Gigabit Ethernet

The hme(4) driver supports the on-board Ethernet interfaces of many Sun
UltraSPARC workstation and server models. Cards supported by the hme(4)
driver include:

-   Sun PCI SunSwift Adapter

-   Sun SBus SunSwift Adapter “( hme” and “SUNW,hme”)

-   Sun PCI Sun100BaseT Adapter 2.0

-   Sun SBus Sun100BaseT 2.0

-   Sun PCI Quad FastEthernet Controller

-   Sun SBus Quad FastEthernet Controller

The kue(4) driver supports Kawasaki LSI KL5KLUSB101B based USB Ethernet
adapters including:

-   3Com 3c19250

-   3Com 3c460 HomeConnect Ethernet USB Adapter

-   ADS Technologies USB-10BT

-   AOX USB101

-   ATen UC10T

-   Abocom URE 450

-   Corega USB-T

-   D-Link DSB-650C

-   Entrega NET-USB-E45, NET-HUB-3U1E

-   I/O Data USB ETT

-   Kawasaki DU-H3E

-   LinkSys USB10T

-   Netgear EA101

-   Peracom USB Ethernet Adapter

-   Psion Gold Port USB Ethernet adapter

-   SMC 2102USB, 2104USB

The re(4) driver supports RealTek RTL8139C+, RTL8169, RTL816xS,
RTL811xS, and RTL8101E based Fast Ethernet and Gigabit Ethernet adapters
including:

-   Alloy Computer Products EtherGOLD 1439E 10/100 (8139C+)

-   Compaq Evo N1015v Integrated Ethernet (8139C+)

-   Corega CG-LAPCIGT Gigabit Ethernet (8169S)

-   D-Link DGE-528(T) Gigabit Ethernet (8169S)

-   Gigabyte 7N400 Pro2 Integrated Gigabit Ethernet (8110S)

-   LevelOne GNC-0105T (8169S)

-   LinkSys EG1032 (32-bit PCI)

-   PLANEX COMMUNICATIONS Inc. GN-1200TC (8169S)

-   Xterasys XN-152 10/100/1000 NIC (8169)

Adapters supported by the rl(4) driver include:

-   Accton “Cheetah” EN1207D (MPX 5030/5038; RealTek 8139 clone)

-   Allied Telesyn AT2550

-   Allied Telesyn AT2500TX

-   Belkin F5D5000

-   BUFFALO (Melco INC.) LPC-CB-CLX (CardBus)

-   Compaq HNE-300

-   CompUSA no-name 10/100 PCI Ethernet NIC

-   Corega FEther CB-TXD

-   Corega FEtherII CB-TXD

-   D-Link DFE-528TX

-   D-Link DFE-530TX+

-   D-Link DFE-538TX

-   D-Link DFE-690TXD

-   Edimax EP-4103DL CardBus

-   Encore ENL832-TX 10/100 M PCI

-   Farallon NetLINE 10/100 PCI

-   Genius GF100TXR

-   GigaFast Ethernet EE100-AXP

-   KTX-9130TX 10/100 Fast Ethernet

-   LevelOne FPC-0106TX

-   Longshine LCS-8038TX-R

-   NDC Communications NE100TX-E

-   Netronix Inc. EA-1210 NetEther 10/100

-   Nortel Networks 10/100BaseTX

-   OvisLink LEF-8129TX

-   OvisLink LEF-8139TX

-   Peppercon AG ROL-F

-   Planex FNW-3603-TX

-   Planex FNW-3800-TX

-   SMC EZ Card 10/100 PCI 1211-TX

-   SOHO (PRAGMATIC) UE-1211C

The xl(4) driver supports the following hardware:

-   3Com 3c900-TPO

-   3Com 3c900-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905-TX

-   3Com 3c905-T4

-   3Com 3c900B-TPO

-   3Com 3c900B-TPC

-   3Com 3c900B-FL

-   3Com 3c900B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905B-T4

-   3Com 3c905B-TX

-   3Com 3c905B-FX

-   3Com 3c905B-COMBO

-   3Com 3c905C-TX

-   3Com 3c980, 3c980B, and 3c980C server adapters

-   3Com 3cSOHO100-TX OfficeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c450 HomeConnect adapters

-   3Com 3c555, 3c556 and 3c556B mini-PCI adapters

-   3Com 3C3SH573BT, 3C575TX, 3CCFE575BT, 3CXFE575BT, 3CCFE575CT,
    3CXFE575CT, 3CCFEM656, 3CCFEM656B, and 3CCFEM656C, 3CXFEM656,
    3CXFEM656B, and 3CXFEM656C CardBus adapters

-   3Com 3c905-TX, 3c905B-TX 3c905C-TX, 3c920B-EMB, and 3c920B-EMB-WNM
    embedded adapters

Both the 3C656 family of CardBus cards and the 3C556 family of MiniPCI
cards have a built-in proprietary modem. Neither the xl(4) driver nor
any other driver supports this modem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.3 Token Ring Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.4 FDDI Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.5 ATM Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.6 Wireless Network Interfaces

[i386, amd64] Intel PRO/Wireless 2100 MiniPCI network adapter ( ipw(4)
driver)

[i386, amd64] Intel PRO/Wireless 2200BG/2915ABG MiniPCI and 2225BG PCI
network adapters ( iwi(4) driver)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.7 Miscellaneous Networks

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.8 ISDN Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.9 Serial Interfaces

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.10 Sound Devices

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.11 Camera and Video Capture Devices

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.12 USB Devices

The ohci(4) driver supports all OHCI v1.0 compliant controllers
including:

-   AcerLabs M5237 (Aladdin-V)

-   AMD-756

-   OPTi 82C861 (FireLink)

-   NEC uPD 9210

-   CMD Tech 670 (USB0670)

-   CMD Tech 673 (USB0673)

-   NVIDIA nForce3

-   Sun PCIO-2 (RIO USB)

The uhci(4) driver supports all UHCI v1.1 compliant controllers
including:

-   Intel 82371AB/EB (PIIX4)

-   Intel 82371SB (PIIX3)

-   VIA 83C572

The following devices are supported by the urio(4) driver:

-   Diamond MultiMedia Rio 500

-   Diamond MultiMedia Rio 600

-   Diamond MultiMedia Rio 800

The ulpt(4) driver provides support for USB printers and parallel
printer conversion cables, including the following:

-   ATen parallel printer adapter

-   Belkin F5U002 parallel printer adapter

-   Canon BJ F850, S600

-   Canon LBP-1310, 350

-   Entrega USB-to-parallel printer adapter

-   Hewlett-Packard HP Deskjet 3420 (P/N: C8947A #ABJ)

-   Oki Data MICROLINE ML660PS

-   Seiko Epson PM-900C, 880C, 820C, 730C

The umct(4) driver supports the following adapters:

-   Belkin F5U109

-   Belkin F5U409

-   D-Link DU-H3SP USB BAY Hub

-   Magic Control Technology USB-232

-   Sitecom USB-232

Because there is no standard device class for USB scanners, this driver
will only recognise devices whose USB IDs are explicitly listed in the
table in the driver itself. The following devices are supported to date:

-   Acer Acerscan: 320U, 620U, 640U, 640BT, 1240U, C310U;

-   AGFA SnapScan: 1212U, 1236U, e20, e25, e26, e40, e50, e52, SnapScan
    Touch;

-   Avision 1200U

-   Canon CanoScan: D660U, N656U, N676U, N1220U, LIDE 20, LIDE 25, LIDE
    30;

-   Epson Perfection: 610, 636U / 636Photo, 640U, 1200U / 1200Photo,
    1240U / 1240Photo, 1250, 1260, 1270, 1600, 1640SU, 1650, 1660, 1670,
    2480, 3200, 3500, 3590, 4200, 4990;

-   Epson: GT-8400UF, GT-9300UF, GT-9700F;

-   Epson Stylus: Photo RX425, CX3650, DX-5000, DX-5050, DX-6000,
    DX-6050 (and possibly more in the CX-5000 and DX-3800..DX-7000
    family);

-   Hewlett Packard: Photosmart S20

-   Hewlett Packard Scanjet: 2200C, 3300C, 3400CSE, 4100C, 4200C, 4300C,
    5200C, 5300C, 5400C, 6200C, 6300C, 8200C, 8250C, 8290C;

-   KYE ColorPage Vivid-Pro

-   Microtek Phantom: 336CX, C6;

-   Microtek ScanMaker: V6UL V6USL, X6U;

-   Minolta 5400

-   Mustek: 600 CU, 1200 CU, 1200 UB, 1200 USB;

-   Mustek BearPaw: 1200F, 1200TA;

-   NatSemi BearPaw 1200

-   Nikon CoolScan LS40 ED

-   Primax 6200

-   Primax Colorado: 1200u, 600u, USB 19200, USB 9600;

-   Primax: G2-200, G2-300, G2-600, G2600, G2E-300, G2E-3002, G2E-600,
    G2E600, G2X-300, G600, ReadyScan 636i;

-   Ultima 1200 UB Plus

-   UMAX Astra: 1220U, 1236U, 2000U, 2100U, 2200U, 3400;

-   Visioneer OneTouch: 3000, 5300, 7600, 6100, 6200, 8100, 8600;

The umass(4) driver supports USB Mass Storage devices, including:

-   ADTEC Stick Drive AD-UST32M, 64M, 128M, 256M

-   Denno FireWire/USB2 Removable 2.5-inch HDD Case MIFU-25CB20

-   FujiFilm Zip USB Drive ZDR100 USB A

-   GREEN HOUSE USB Flash Memory "PicoDrive" GH-UFD32M, 64M, 128M

-   IBM 32MB USB Memory Key (P/N 22P5296)

-   IBM 256MB USB Drive (MSYSTEM DiskOnKey2)

-   IBM ThinkPad USB Portable CD-ROM Drive (P/N 33L5151)

-   I-O DATA USB CD/CD-R/CD-RW/DVD-R/DVD-RW/DVD-RAM/DVD-ROM Drive
    DVR-iUH2 (CDROM, DVD-RAM only)

-   I-O DATA USB x6 CD-RW Drive CDRW-i64/USB (CDROM only)

-   I-O DATA USB/IEEE1394 Portable HD Drive HDP-i30P/CI, HDP-i40P/CI

-   Iomega USB Zip 100/250 drive

-   Iomega Zip750 USB2.0 drive

-   Keian USB1.1/2.0 3.5-inch HDD Case KU350A

-   Kurouto Shikou USB 2.5-inch HDD Case GAWAP2.5PS-USB2.0

-   LaCie P3 HardDrive USB 200GB

-   Logitec LDR-H443U2 DVD-RAM/-R/+R/-RW/+RW drive

-   Logitec Mobile USB Memory LMC-256UD

-   Logitec USB1.1/2.0 HDD Unit SHD-E60U2

-   Logitec USB Double-Speed Floppy Drive LFD-31U2

-   Logitec USB/IEEE1394 DVD-RAM/R/RW Unit LDR-N21FU2 (CDROM only)

-   MELCO USB Flash Disk "ClipDrive", RUF-C32M, -C64M, -C128M, -C256M,
    -C512M

-   MELCO USB Flash Disk "PetitDrive", RUF-32M, -64M, -128M, -256Mm

-   MELCO USB2.0 Flash Disk "PetitDrive2", RUF-256M/U2, -512M/U2

-   MELCO USB2.0 MO Drive MO-CH640U2

-   Matshita CF-VFDU03 floppy drive

-   Merlin SM300 MP3/WMA Player (256Mb)

-   Microtech International, Inc. USB-SCSI-HD 50 USB to SCSI cable

-   Motorola E398 Mobile Phone (TransFlash memory card)

-   NOVAC USB2.0 2.5/3.5-inch HDD Case NV-HD351U

-   PNY Attache Flash Drive

-   Panasonic ("Matshita FDD CF-VFDU03")

-   Panasonic KXL-CB20AN Portable DVD-ROM/CD-R/RW

-   Panasonic KXL-CB35AN (DVD-ROM & CD-R/RW)

-   Panasonic USB2.0 Portable CD-RW Drive KXL-RW40AN (CDROM only)

-   Panasonic floppy drive

-   Qware BeatZkey! Pro

-   RATOC Systems USB2.0 Removable HDD Case U2-MDK1, U2-MDK1B

-   SanDisk SDDR-31 (Compact Flash)

-   SanDisk SDDR-75 (only Compact Flash port works)

-   Sitecom CN-300 MultiFlash (MMC/SD, SmartMedia, CF, MemoryStick)

-   Sony Portable CD-R/RW Drive CRX10U (CDROM only)

-   TEAC Portable USB CD-ROM Unit CD-110PU/210PU

-   Time DPA20B MP3 Player (1Gb)

-   Trek Thumbdrive 8MB

-   VAIO floppy drive (includes Y-E Data Flashbuster-U)

-   Y-E Data floppy drive (720/1.44/2.88Mb)

Among the supported digital cameras are:

-   Asahi Optical (PENTAX) Optio 230 & 330

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.13 IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Devices

The fwohci(4) driver provides support for PCI/CardBus FireWire interface
cards. The driver supports the following IEEE 1394 OHCI chipsets:

-   Adaptec AHA-894x/AIC-5800

-   Apple Pangea

-   Apple UniNorth

-   Intel 82372FB

-   IOGEAR GUF320

-   Lucent / Agere FW322/323

-   NEC uPD72861

-   NEC uPD72870

-   NEC uPD72871/2

-   NEC uPD72873

-   NEC uPD72874

-   National Semiconductor CS4210

-   Ricoh R5C551

-   Ricoh R5C552

-   Sony CX3022

-   Sony i.LINK (CXD1947)

-   Sony i.LINK (CXD3222)

-   Sun PCIO-2 (RIO 1394)

-   Texas Instruments PCI4410A

-   Texas Instruments PCI4450

-   Texas Instruments PCI4451

-   Texas Instruments TSB12LV22

-   Texas Instruments TSB12LV23

-   Texas Instruments TSB12LV26

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AA22

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AB21/A/AI/A-EP

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AB22/A

-   Texas Instruments TSB43AB23

-   Texas Instruments TSB82AA2

-   VIA Fire II (VT6306)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.14 Bluetooth Devices

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.15 Cryptographic Accelerators

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.16 Miscellaneous

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
