[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 6.2-RELEASE Errata

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007 The FreeBSD
Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/errata/article.sgml,v
1.73.2.51 2007/11/30 05:55:05 bmah Exp $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “®” symbol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This document lists errata items for FreeBSD 6.2-RELEASE, containing
  significant information discovered after the release or too late in
  the release cycle to be otherwise included in the release
  documentation. This information includes security advisories, as well
  as news relating to the software or documentation that could affect
  its operation or usability. An up-to-date version of this document
  should always be consulted before installing this version of FreeBSD.

  This errata document for FreeBSD 6.2-RELEASE will be maintained until
  the release of FreeBSD 6.3-RELEASE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This errata document contains “late-breaking news” about FreeBSD
6.2-RELEASE. Before installing this version, it is important to consult
this document to learn about any post-release discoveries or problems
that may already have been found and fixed.

Any version of this errata document actually distributed with the
release (for example, on a CDROM distribution) will be out of date by
definition, but other copies are kept updated on the Internet and should
be consulted as the “current errata” for this release. These other
copies of the errata are located at http://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/,
plus any sites which keep up-to-date mirrors of this location.

Source and binary snapshots of FreeBSD 6-STABLE also contain up-to-date
copies of this document (as of the time of the snapshot).

For a list of all FreeBSD CERT security advisories, see
http://security.FreeBSD.org/ or ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/CERT/.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 Late-Breaking News and Corrections

[20070116] The release notes should have mentioned that a separate ISO
image has been created with readable documentation files. It contains
renderings of the documention for all supported languages; the last
several FreeBSD releases only contained English documents due to space
limitations.

[20070116] Some versions of the release announcement contained an
incorrect manual page reference for the GELI disk encryption subsystem.
The correct manual page is geli(8).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Security Advisories

The following security advisories pertain to FreeBSD 6.2-RELEASE. For
more information, consult the individual advisories available from
http://security.FreeBSD.org/.

+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| Advisory    | Date        | Topic                                    |
+=============+=============+==========================================+
| SA          | 9 Fe        | Multiple Denial of Service               |
| -07:02.bind | bruary 2007 | vulnerabilities in named(8)              |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA          | 26          | IPv6 Routing Header 0 is dangerous       |
| -07:03.ipv6 |  April 2007 |                                          |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA-07:05    | 1           | Errors handling corrupt tar files in     |
| .libarchive | 2 July 2007 | libarchive(3)                            |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA-0        | 29 No       | Random value disclosure                  |
| 7:09.random | vember 2007 |                                          |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4 Known Problems and Solutions

[20070116] As mentioned in the release notes, the arcmsr(4) driver was
updated for FreeBSD 6.2-RELEASE. Some isolated crash problems were noted
after this update, although the driver in general tends to work quite
well for many testers, and it seems to be “better” in general in terms
of functionality and supported hardware. Users having problems may wish
to consider backing out the driver update or installing a version of
this driver directly from Areca. Further investigation is continuing
into these issues.

[20070116] FreeBSD 6.2-RELEASE has been diagnosed with kernel bug
related to UNIX-domain sockets. A patch for this problem has been
committed to HEAD and RELENG_6, and is a candidate for an errata patch
to RELENG_6_2 after further testing.

[20070116, update 20070212] Systems with very heavy network activity
have been observed to have some problems with the kernel memory
allocator. Symptoms are processes that get stuck in zonelimit state, or
system livelocks. One partial workaround for this problem is to add the
following line to /boot/loader.conf and reboot:

    kern.ipc.nmbclusters="0"

Other workarounds have been discussed on the freebsd-current@ and
freebsd-stable@ mailing lists.

A bugfix has been committed to HEAD and has been merged to RELENG_6.

[20070123, updated 20070307 FreeBSD 6.2-RELEASE does not properly add a
host route to the destination of a gif(4) interface configured as an
IPv6 point-to-point interface. This makes it impossible to send traffic
across the tunnel. A workaround is to add the required route manually.
If the gif(4) interface was configured as:

    # ifconfig gif0 ADDRESS/128 DESTINATION

then the correct route can be added with this command:

    # route add -host -inet6 DESTINATION -iface gif0 -llinfo -nostatic

A fix for this problem has been committed to HEAD, RELENG_6, and
RELENG_6_2. Further details are given in FreeBSD Errata Notice
EN-07:02.net.

[20070307] Under certain circumstances, a failed jail(8) startup may
cause some undesired changes to a host's network interface
configuration, due to a bug in the rc.d/jail startup script. This
problem has been corrected on HEAD, RELENG_6, and RELENG_6_2, and is
documented in FreeBSD Errata Notice EN-07:03.rc.d_jail.

[20070318] The freebsd-update(8) client included in FreeBSD 6.2-RELEASE
does not properly update SMP kernels. This bug has been fixed on HEAD,
RELENG_6, and RELENG_6_2, as described in FreeBSD Errata Notice
EN-07:05.freebsd-update.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
http://www.FreeBSD.org/snapshots/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

All users of FreeBSD 6-STABLE should subscribe to the
<stable@FreeBSD.org> mailing list.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
