[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

Â 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 11.1-RELEASE Release Notes

Abstract

The release notes for FreeBSD 11.0-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system on the 11.0-STABLE development
line. This document lists applicable security advisories that were
issued since the last release, as well as significant changes to the
FreeBSD kernel and userland. Some brief remarks on upgrading are also
presented.

Table of Contents

-   Introduction

-   Upgrading from Previous Releases of FreeBSD

-   Security and Errata

    -   Security Advisories

    -   Errata Notices

-   Userland

    -   Userland Configuration Changes

    -   Userland Application Changes

    -   Contributed Software

    -   Installation and Configuration Tools

    -   /etc/rc.d Scripts

    -   /etc/periodic Scripts

    -   Runtime Libraries and API

    -   ABI Compatibility

    -   Userland Debugging

-   Kernel

    -   General Kernel Changes

    -   Kernel Bug Fixes

    -   Kernel Configuration

    -   Kernel Modules

    -   System Tuning and Controls

-   Devices and Drivers

    -   Device Drivers

    -   Storage Drivers

    -   Network Drivers

-   Hardware Support

    -   Hardware Support

    -   Virtualization Support

    -   ARM Support

-   Storage

    -   Networked Storage

    -   ZFS

-   Boot Loader Changes

    -   Boot Loader Changes

-   Networking

    -   General Network Changes

    -   Network Protocols

-   Ports Collection and Package Infrastructure

    -   Packaging Changes

Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 11.1-RELEASE. It
describes recently added, changed, or deleted features of FreeBSD. It
also provides some notes on upgrading from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 11.1-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at https://www.FreeBSD.org/releases/ or any of its mirrors.
More information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the Obtaining FreeBSD' appendix to the FreeBSD
Handbook.

All users are encouraged to consult the release errata before installing
FreeBSD. The errata document is updated with "late-breaking" information
discovered late in the release cycle or after the release. Typically, it
contains information on known bugs, security advisories, and corrections
to documentation. An up-to-date copy of the errata for FreeBSD
11.1-RELEASE can be found on the FreeBSD Web site.

This document describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 11.0-RELEASE. In general, changes described here are
unique to the 11.1-STABLE branch unless specifically marked as MERGED
features.

Typical release note items document recent security advisories issued
after 11.0-RELEASE, new drivers or hardware support, new commands or
options, major bug fixes, or contributed software upgrades. They may
also list changes to major ports/packages or release engineering
practices. Clearly the release notes cannot list every single change
made to FreeBSD between releases; this document focuses primarily on
security advisories, user-visible changes, and major architectural
improvements.

Upgrading from Previous Releases of FreeBSD

[amd64,i386] Binary upgrades between RELEASE versions (and snapshots of
the various security branches) are supported using the freebsd-update(8)
utility. The binary upgrade procedure will update unmodified userland
utilities, as well as unmodified GENERIC kernels distributed as a part
of an official FreeBSD release. The freebsd-update(8) utility requires
that the host being upgraded have Internet connectivity.

Source-based upgrades (those based on recompiling the FreeBSD base
system from source code) from previous versions are supported, according
to the instructions in /usr/src/UPDATING.

Important:
Upgrading FreeBSD should only be attempted after backing up all data and
configuration files.

Security and Errata

This section lists the various Security Advisories and Errata Notices
since 11.0-RELEASE.

Security Advisories

+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| Advisory                  | Date               | Topic              |
+===========================+====================+====================+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:32.bhyve    | 25 October 2016    | Privilege          |
|                           |                    | escalation         |
|                           |                    | vulnerability      |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:33.openssh  | 2 November 2016    | Remote Denial of   |
|                           |                    | Service            |
|                           |                    | vulnerability      |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:36.telnetd  | 6 December 2016    | Possible login(1)  |
|                           |                    | argument injection |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:37.libc     | 6 December 2016    | link_ntoa(3)       |
|                           |                    | buffer overflow    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:38.bhyve    | 6 December 2016    | Possible escape    |
|                           |                    | from bhyve(8)      |
|                           |                    | virtual machine    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-16:39.ntp      | 22 December 2016   | Multiple           |
|                           |                    | vulnerabilities    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-17:01.openssh  | 10 January 2017    | Multiple           |
|                           |                    | vulnerabilities    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-17:02.openssl  | 23 February 2017   | Multiple           |
|                           |                    | vulnerabilities    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-17:03.ntp      | 12 April 2017      | Multiple           |
|                           |                    | vulnerabilities    |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-17:04.ipfilter | 27 April 2017      | Fix fragment       |
|                           |                    | handling panic     |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-SA-17:05.heimdal  | 12 July 2017       | Fix KDC-REP        |
|                           |                    | service name       |
|                           |                    | validation         |
|                           |                    | vulnerability      |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Errata Notices

+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| Errata                    | Date               | Topic              |
+===========================+====================+====================+
| FreeBSD-EN-16:18.loader   | 25 October 2016    | Loader may hang    |
|                           |                    | during boot        |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-16:19.tzcode   | 6 December 2016    | Fix warnings about |
|                           |                    | invalid timezone   |
|                           |                    | abbreviations      |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-16:20.tzdata   | 6 December 2016    | Update timezone    |
|                           |                    | database           |
|                           |                    | information        |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| F                         | 6 December 2016    | Fix incorrectly    |
| reeBSD-EN-16:21.localedef |                    | defined unicode    |
|                           |                    | characters         |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-17:01.pcie     | 23 February 2017   | Fix system hang    |
|                           |                    | when booting when  |
|                           |                    | PCI-express        |
|                           |                    | HotPlug is enabled |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-17:02.yp       | 23 February 2017   | Fix NIS master     |
|                           |                    | updates are not    |
|                           |                    | pushed to an NIS   |
|                           |                    | slave              |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-17:03.hyperv   | 23 February 2017   | Fix compatibility  |
|                           |                    | with               |
|                           |                    | Hyper-V/storage    |
|                           |                    | after KB3172614 or |
|                           |                    | KB3179574          |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-17:04.mandoc   | 23 February 2017   | Make makewhatis(1) |
|                           |                    | output             |
|                           |                    | reproducible       |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| FreeBSD-EN-17:05.xen      | 23 February 2017   | Xen migration      |
|                           |                    | enhancements       |
+---------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Userland

This section covers changes and additions to userland applications,
contributed software, and system utilities.

Userland Configuration Changes

The inetd(8) utility is now built without libwrap support when
WITHOUT_TCP_WRAPPERS is set in src.conf(5). (r313203)

The libthr(3) library and related files are now evaluated and removed by
the delete-old-libs target when upgrading the system if WITHOUT_LIBTHR
is set in src.conf(5). (r316045)

The WITH_LLD_AS_LD build knob has been added, which installs LLD as
/usr/bin/ld if set. (r316423) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

LLD has been enabled by default and installed as /usr/bin/ld on
FreeBSD/arm64. (r318472) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The WITH_RPCBIND_WARMSTART_SUPPORT src.conf(5) knob has been added,
which when enabled allows building rpcbind(8) with warmstart support.
(r319244)

Userland Application Changes

Support for blacklistd(8) has been added to OpenSSH. (r305476)
(Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The bspatch(1) utility has been updated with capsicum(4) support.
(r306213)

The cron(8) utility has been updated to add support for including files
within /etc/cron.d and /usr/local/etc/cron.d by default. (r308720)
(Sponsored by Gandi.net)

The syslogd(8) utility has been updated to add the include keyword which
allows specifying a directory containing configuration files to be
included in addition to syslog.conf(5). The default syslog.conf(5) has
been updated to include /etc/syslog.d and /usr/local/etc/syslog.d by
default. (r308721) (Sponsored by Gandi.net)

The zfsbootcfg(8) utility has been added, providing one-time
boot.config(5)-style options for zfsboot(8). (r308914)

The setkey(8) utility has been modified to show the runtime NAT-T
configuration. The -g and -t flags have been added, which list only
global and virtual policies, respectively, when used with the -D and -P
flags. (r315514) (Sponsored by Yandex LLC)

The getaddrinfo(1) utility has been added, ported from NetBSD. (r316098)
(Sponsored by Dell EMC)

The jail(8) utility has been updated to allow explicitly-assigned IPv4
and IPv6 addresses to be used within a jail. (r316944) (Sponsored by
Multiplay)

The daemon(8) utility has been updated to allow redirecting stdout(4)
and stderr(4) output to syslog(3) or to a file. (r317855)

The efivar(8) utility has been added, providing an interface to manage
UEFI variables. (r318576) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The cxgbetool(8) utility has been added, providing command-line access
to features and debugging facilities of cxgbe(4) devices. (r319388)

The primes(6) utility now enumerates primes beyond 3825123056546413050,
up to a new limit of 2^64 - 1. (r320218)

The rcp(1), rlogin(1), rsh(1), ruptime(1), rwho(1), rlogind(8), rshd(8),
and rwhod(8) utilities have been marked as deprecated, and planned for
removal in FreeBSD 12.0-RELEASE. (r320654)

The gdb(1) and kgdb(1) utilities have been marked as deprecated, and
planned for removal from the base system in the future. A newer version
is available in the devel/gdb port. (r320874)

Contributed Software

readelf(1) has been updated to report arm program and section header
types. (r305837)

The ELF Tool Chain has been updated to upstream revision r3490.
(r305844) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

groff(1) has been updated to use the changelog date rather than file
modification date in manual pages for build reproducibility. (r307631)

Note: groff(1) is planned to be deprecated effective FreeBSD
12.0-RELEASE.

unbound(8) has been updated to version 1.5.10. (r307729)

strings(1) has been updated to fix the exit status when multiple files
are provided as arguments, and an error is encountered before the last
file. (r309125)

makewhatis(1) has been updated to produce build-reproducible output.
(r309183) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

Subversion has been updated to version 1.9.5. (r309511)

file(1) has been updated to version 5.29. (r309847)

The amd(8) utility has been updated to version 6.2. (r310490)

The CLDR locales have been updated to version 30.0.3. The unicode
locales have been updated to version 9.0.0. (r312336)

xz(1) has been updated to version 5.2.3. (r312517)

tcpdump(1) has been updated to version 4.9.0. (r313537)

zlib(3) has been updated to version 1.2.11. (r313795)

openresolv has been updated to version 3.9.0. (r313980)

The NetBSD test suite has been updated to the 01.11.2017_23.20 snapshot.
(r313680)

libucl has been updated to version 20170219. (r314278)

libarchive(3) has been updated to version 3.3.1. (r315432)

dma(8) has been updated to the 2017-02-10 snapshot. (r315995)

ntpd(8) has been updated to version 4.2.8p10. (r316068)

ACPICA has been updated to version 20170303. (r316303)

Timezone data files have been updated to version 2017b. (r316349)

mandoc(1) has been updated to version 1.14. (r316420)

Clang has been updated to version 4.0.0. (r316423)

LLVM has been updated to version 4.0.0. (r316423)

LLD has been updated to version 4.0.0. (r316423)

LLDB has been updated to version 4.0.0. (r316423)

compiler-rt has been updated to version 4.0.0. (r316423)

libc++ has been updated to version 4.0.0. (r316423)

tcsh(1) has been updated to version 6.20.00. (r316957)

blacklistd(8) has been updated to the 20170503 snapshot. (r318239)
(Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

blacklistd(8) support for OpenSSH has been refined to adjust
notification points to catch all authentication failures rather than
only those caused by invalid login usernames. (r318402) (Sponsored by
The FreeBSD Foundation)

byacc(1) has been updated to version 20170201. (r319349)

bmake has been updated to version 20170510. (r319884)

Installation and Configuration Tools

The installer, bsdinstall(8), has been updated to include support for
hidden wireless networks when configuring the wlan(4) interface.
(r311686)

The default EFI partition created by bsdinstall(8) has been increased
from 800KB to 200MB. (r320088) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

/etc/rc.d Scripts

The jail_confwarn rc.conf(5) entry has been added, which suppresses
warnings about obsolete
per-http://www.FreeBSD.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=jail&sektion=8&manpath=freebsd-release-ports[jail(8)]
configurations. (r310009) (Sponsored by FIS Global, Inc.)

/etc/periodic Scripts

The default periodic.conf(5) has been updated to include the
anticongestion_sleeptime option, consolidating random sleeps in
periodic(8) scripts and replacing the daily_ntpd_avoid_congestion
option. The default value is 3600 seconds. (r317373)

The 410.status-mfi periodic(8) script has been added to monitor the
status of mfi(4) volumes. (r317857)

Runtime Libraries and API

The libmd library has been updated to introduce functions that operate
on fd(4) instead of filename. (r310372)

The kvm_close(3) function has been updated to return the accumulated
error from previous close(2) calls. (r316039)

The C standard library has been updated to make use of reallocarray(3)
for bounds checking. (r316613)

The clock_nanosleep() system call has been added. The nanosleep() system
call is now a wrapper around clock_nanosleep(). (r317618) (Sponsored by
Dell EMC)

The system libraries have been updated to make use of reallocarray(3)
for bounds checking. (r318121)

ABI Compatibility

The type max_align_t is now defined for C11 compliance. (r309258)

The sem_clockwait_np() library function has been added, which allows the
caller to specify the reference clock and choose between absolute and
relative mode. (r315274) (Sponsored by Dell EMC)

The clang nullability qualifiers have been added to the C library
headers. (r315282)

Uses of the GNU nonnull attribute have been replaced with the more
benign Clang nullability attributes. (r315282)

Userland Debugging

ptrace(2) now supports events for vfork(2), permitting reliable
debugging across vfork(2) invocations. (r304499)

Process core dumps now include the process ID (PID) and command line
arguments. (r306786)

Kernel

This section covers changes to kernel configurations, system tuning, and
system control parameters that are not otherwise categorized.

General Kernel Changes

The getdtablesize(2) system call is now permitted in capability mode.
(r305514)

The kern.proc.nfds sysctl(8) is now permitted in capability mode.
(r305516)

The sys/conf/newvers.sh script has been updated with an option to
exclude build-specific metadata from the kernel for build
reproducibility. (r312249)

Kernel Bug Fixes

The ipf(4) packet filter has been updated to prevent keep state from
incorrectly implying keep frags, matching the behavior documented in
ipf(5). (r317434)

Kernel Configuration

The WITH_REPRODUCIBLE_BUILD src.conf(5) knob has been added, which when
set, excludes build-specific metadata from the kernel, for build
reproducibility. (r312730)

Support for NAT-T is now enabled by default. The IPSEC_NAT_T kernel
configuration option has been removed. (r315514) (Sponsored by Yandex
LLC)

The IPSEC_FILTERTUNNEL kernel option has been removed, which was
deprecated by the net.inet.ipsec.filtertunnel sysctl. (r315514)
(Sponsored by Yandex LLC)

The EARLY_AP_STARTUP option has been enabled by default on amd64 and
i386 architectures, which when enabled releases Application Processors
(APs) earlier in the kernel startup process. (r318763)

Kernel Modules

cloudabi(4) has been updated to allow running 32-bit binaries within
64-bit userland environments when the kernel configuration file has the
COMPAT_CLOUDABI32 option present. (r307144)

The ipsec and tcpmd5 kernel modules have been added. (r315514)
(Sponsored by Yandex LLC)

Note: Following the addition of the tcpmd5 module, it is now necessary
to have a security association (SA) entry for both inbound and outbound
directions.

The ipfw(4) packet filter has been updated to add support for named
dynamic states. (r316274) (Sponsored by Yandex LLC)

The ipfw_nptv6 kernel module has been added, implementing Network Prefix
Translation for IPv6 as defined in RFC 6296. (r316444) (Sponsored by
Yandex LLC)

The ipfw_nat64 kernel module has been added, implementing stateless and
stateful NAT64. (r316446) (Sponsored by Yandex LLC)

The cfumass(4) device has been added, providing a storage frontend to
USB OTG-capable hardware. (r316660) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD
Foundation)

The ipfw_pmod kernel module has been added, designed for modifying
packets of any protocol. (r317045) (Sponsored by Yandex LLC)

Note: At present, only TCP MSS modification is implemented.

System Tuning and Controls

The vfs.root_mount_always_wait tunable has been added, which forces the
kernel to wait for root mount holds even if the root device is already
present. (r315539)

When the system real time clock (RTC) is adjusted, such as by
clock_settime(), sleeping threads are now awakened and absolute sleep
times are reevaluated based on the new value of the RTC. (r316120)
(Sponsored by Dell EMC)

Devices and Drivers

This section covers changes and additions to devices and device drivers
since 11.0-RELEASE.

Device Drivers

The jedec_ts(4) driver has been added, providing support for thermal
sensors on memory modules. The driver currently supports chips that are
fully compliant with the JEDEC JC 42.4 specification. (r307768)

The chromebook_platform(4) driver has been added, providing support for
various Chromebook models. (r308104)

The bytgpio(4) driver has been added, providing support for Intel Bay
Trailâ¢ SoC GPIO controllers. (r308942)

/dev/kmem no longer supports access via mmap(). Consumers wishing to use
/dev/kmem must use read() and write(). (r312394)

devctl(8) now supports a "clear driver" command as a complement to "set
driver". (r306533) (Sponsored by Chelsio Communications)

The digi(4), ie(4), mcd(4), scd(4), si(4), spic(4), and wl(4) drivers
have been marked as deprecated, and removed in FreeBSD 12.0. The
associated sicontrol(8) and wlconfig(8) utilities have been deprecated,
as well. (r320954)

Storage Drivers

The mpr(4) driver has been updated to support tri-mode (SAS/SATA/PCIe)
Broadcom storage adapters. (r319435)

Network Drivers

The cxgbe(4) driver has been updated to provide support for Virtual
Function devices (VFs) on Chelsio T4 and T5 adapters. (r306660)
(Sponsored by Chelsio Communications)

TCP connections using the TCP Offload Engine (TOE) on Chelsio T4+
adapters can now perform zero-copy sends via aio_write(). (r306661)
(Sponsored by Chelsio Communications)

The cxgbev(4) driver has been added, providing support for Virtual
Function devices (VFs) on Chelsio T4 and T5 adapters. (r306664)
(Sponsored by Chelsio Communications)

The bnxt(4) driver has been added, providing support for Broadcom
NetXtreme-Câ¢ and NetXtreme-Eâ¢ devices. (r309377) (Sponsored by Broadcom
Limited)

The cxgbe(4) driver now supports devices using T6-based adapters which
support 10, 25, 40, and 100 Gbps. (r309560) (Sponsored by Chelsio
Communications)

The cxgbe(4) driver has been updated to provide support for Virtual
Function devices (VFs) on Chelsio T6 adapters. (r309560) (Sponsored by
Chelsio Communications)

The cxgbev(4) driver has been updated to provide support for Virtual
Function devices (VFs) on Chelsio T6 adapters. (r309560) (Sponsored by
Chelsio Communications)

The miibus(4) driver has been updated to support Microchip/Micrel
KSZ9031 Gigabit ethernet cards. (r310852) (Sponsored by Rubicon
Communications, LLC (Netgate))

The alc(4) driver has been updated to provide support for Atheros Killer
E2400â¢ Gigabit ethernet cards. (r312358)

The alc(4) driver has been updated to provide support for Atheros Killer
E2500â¢ Gigabit ethernet cards. (r314005) (Sponsored by Microsoft)

The etherswitch(4) driver has been updated to support RTL8366RB and
RTL8366SR cards. (r315330) (Sponsored by Rubicon Communications, LLC
(Netgate))

The if_ipsec(4) virtual tunneling interface has been added, implementing
route-based VPNs protected with Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP).
(r315514) (Sponsored by Yandex LLC)

The qlnxe(4) driver has been added, providing support for Cavium Qlogicâ¢
45000 Series adapters. (r317116)

The qlxgbe(4) firmware has been updated to version 5.4.64. (r317182)

The ixl(4) driver has been updated to version 1.7.12-k. (r318357)
(Sponsored by Intel Corporation)

The cxgbe(4) driver has been updated to firmware version 1.16.45.0 for
T4, T5, and T6 cards. (r319269) (Sponsored by Chelsio Communications)

The qlnxe(4) driver has been updated to support QLE41XXX hardware.
(r320164)

The qlnxe(4) driver firmware has been updated to version 8.30.0.0.
(r320164)

Hardware Support

This section covers general hardware support for physical machines,
hypervisors, and virtualization environments, as well as hardware
changes and updates that do not otherwise fit in other sections of this
document.

Hardware Support

The atkbdc(4) driver has been updated to provide support for Elantech
trackpads. To enable hardware support, add hw.psm.elantech_support=1 to
loader.conf(5). (r307576)

Virtualization Support

PCI passthrough with bhyve(4) supports more dynamic configurations
permitting devices to be marked for passthrough or host use at runtime.
(r306471) (Sponsored by Chelsio Communications)

PCI passthrough with bhyve(4) resets functions via FLR when a virtual
machine is started and stopped. (r306520) (Sponsored by Chelsio
Communications)

PCI passthrough support has been enabled on FreeBSD virtual machines
running on Microsoft Hyper-Vâ¢. (r309312) (Sponsored by Microsoft)

The hv_netvsc(4) driver SR-IOV implementation has been updated to
support Virtual Function (VF) devices, such as the Mellanox Connect-X3â¢
network card. (r314091) (Sponsored by Microsoft)

Support for Microsoft Hyper-Vâ¢ Generation 2 virtual machines has been
added. (r316272) (Sponsored by Microsoft)

Support for synthetic keyboards has been added for virtual machines
running on Microsoft Hyper-Vâ¢. (r317119) (Sponsored by Microsoft)

The FreeBSD virtual machines provided on Amazon EC2â¢ now enable IPv6 by
default. (r312790)

The ena(4) driver has been added, providing support for "next
generation" Enhanced Networking on the Amazon EC2â¢ platform. (r320760)
(Sponsored by Amazon.com Inc.)

ARM Support

Support for the Allwinner A13 board has been added. (r305436)

Storage

This section covers changes and additions to file systems and other
storage subsystems, both local and networked.

Networked Storage

The NFS client now properly handles NFS4ERR_BAD_SESSION errors received
from an NFS server. Additionally, the kernel RPC client has been updated
to prevent creating new TCP connections when ERESTART is received from
sosend(9). (r318660)

The NFS client now supports the Amazon Elastic File Systemâ¢ (EFS).
(r318660)

ZFS

A new sysctl(8), vfs.zfs.compressed_arc_enabled, has been added, which
when enabled stores compressed, on-disk data in the ZFS ARC, increasing
the amount of data that can be cached in physical memory. It is enabled
by default. (r307265)

The vfs.zfs.debug_flags sysctl(8) has been deprecated in favor of
vfs.zfs.debugflags. Additionally, vfs.zfs.debugflags can now be
configured in loader.conf(5), whereas vfs.zfs.debug_flags could not.
(r318785)

Boot Loader Changes

This section covers the boot loader, boot menu, and other boot-related
changes.

Boot Loader Changes

The UEFI boot loader has been updated for build reproducibility.
(r305845) (Sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation)

The EFI loader has been updated to support TFTPFS, providing netboot
support without requiring an NFS server. (r307632) (Sponsored by
Gandi.net)

Networking

This section describes changes that affect networking in FreeBSD.

General Network Changes

The network stack has been updated to include ip6_tryforward(),
providing performance benefits as result of a reduced number of checks.
(r311681) (Sponsored by Yandex LLC)

The network stack has been modified to fix incorrect or invalid IP
addresses if multiple threads emit a UDP log_in_vain message
concurrently. (r313523) (Sponsored by Dell EMC)

The TCP stack has been changed to use the estimated RTT instead of
timestamps for receive buffer auto resizing. (r317368) (Sponsored by
Multiplay)

Network Protocols

Support for GARP (gratuitous ARP) retransmit has been added. A new
sysctl(8), net.link.ether.inet.garp_rexmit_count, has been added, which
sets the maximum number of retransmissions when set to a non-zero value.
(r309337) (Sponsored by Dell EMC)

Support for the UDP_ENCAP_ESPINUDP_NON_IKE encapsulation type has been
removed. (r315514) (Sponsored by Yandex LLC)

Ports Collection and Package Infrastructure

This section covers changes to the FreeBSD Ports Collection, package
infrastructure, and package maintenance and installation tools.

Packaging Changes

The pkg(8) utility has been updated to version 1.10.1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: June 19, 2021 by Danilo G. Baio

Legal Notices | Â© 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
