[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

A New GEOM Facility, gunion

Contact: Marshall Kirk McKusick <mckusick@mckusick.com>

The gunion facility is used to track changes to a read-only disk on a
writable disk. Logically, a writable disk is placed over a read-only
disk. Write requests are intercepted and stored on the writable disk.
Read requests are first checked to see if they have been written on the
top (writable disk) and if found are returned. If they have not been
written on the top disk, then they are read from the lower disk.

The gunion facility can be especially useful if you have a large disk
with a corrupted filesystem that you are unsure of how to repair. You
can use gunion to place another disk over the corrupted disk and then
attempt to repair the filesystem. If the repair fails, you can revert
all the changes in the upper disk and be back to the unchanged state of
the lower disk thus allowing you to try another approach to repairing
it. If the repair is successful you can commit all the writes recorded
on the top disk to the lower disk.

Another use of the gunion facility is to try out upgrades to your
system. Place the upper disk over the disk holding your filesystem that
is to be upgraded and then run the upgrade on it. If it works, commit
it; if it fails, revert the upgrade.

The gunion(8) utility is used to create and manage an instance of a
gunion. Further details and usage examples can be found in the gunion(8)
manual page. At this time, gunion(8) is available only in 14.0.

Sponsor: Netflix

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: June 3, 2022 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
