[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 2.2 Change Announcement

From jkh:

2.2-RELEASE will not support installation of machines with 4MB of memory
or 1.2MB floppy drives - that is to say, only > 5MB memory & 1.44MB
floppy drive systems are supported. In truth, 8MB of memory is the
recommended minimum.

Those who have such limitations on their configuration and can’t
upgrade, for whatever reason, are therefore urged to stay with
2.1.6-RELEASE, which has provisions for both types of installation and
will probably be more than functional for as long as one might
conceivably wish to continue operating such a system.

We regret any inconvenience this may cause some of our users, but we
have also been pressed for space on the installation media for some time
now, and this was more or less inevitable. We’ve talked about killing
the 4MB installation and 1.2MB floppies for over a year, and it’s only
through some of the most arcane trickery (you don’t want to know) that
we’ve managed to keep it all on a single floppy at all. Now that we’ve
made the leap to 1.44MB/>6MB class machines, we’ve at least bought
ourselves some room for future enhancements while still remaining on one
floppy.

Note that you can still build kernels which will run quite comfortably
in a 4MB system, you just can’t install with only 4MB in the machine. If
you’re trying to build a custom box with 4MB and a tiny configuration,
for example, you might simply build its disk on a different machine set
up specifically for that purpose.

Release Home

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: February 21, 2021 by Danilo G. Baio

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
