[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

-   RSS 2.0 Feed

FreeBSD Project Launches FreeBSD 6.0

FreeBSD raises the bar for open source operating systems.

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Berkeley, CA November 4, 2005

The FreeBSD Project announces the availability of FreeBSD 6.0, an open
source operating system derived from BSD UNIX, which offers a powerful
alternative to Linux, Solaris, and Windows. FreeBSD enables enterprise
organizations to utilize open source technologies that focus on
reliability, security, and scalability.

"Yahoo! is impressed with the performance and stability of FreeBSD 6.0,"
says David Filo, Yahoo! co-founder. Yahoo! is one of many enterprise
companies that rely on the world-renowned stability and performance of
the FreeBSD operating system.

One of the new features in FreeBSD 6.0 is a multithreaded filesystem,
which greatly improves data access times for local disks, RAID
configurations, network filesystems, and SANs. Recent performance
benchmarks show that FreeBSD 6.0 outperforms Linux in raw data
throughput.

Additionally, FreeBSD 6.0 extends support for wireless devices such as
Intel Centrino and adds support for the popular new WPA wireless
security protocol. Several improvements are incorporated into
NDISulator, a component of the operating system that allows Windows
network drivers to run natively under FreeBSD.

FreeBSD now scales much more efficiently across multiple processor
systems. Support for 8 or more processors, such as the new dual core AMD
Opteron configurations, gives consumers a viable alternative against
more expensive, proprietary hardware platforms and operating systems
from IBM, HP, and Sun.

About the FreeBSD Project

The FreeBSD Project provides a free, open source operating system for
several platforms, including Intel x86 and AMD64. FreeBSD is derived
from BSD, the version of UNIX developed at UC Berkeley. The unencumbered
BSD license permits modification and redistribution of the software
while allowing an individual or company to retain intellectual property.

For more information, please visit www.FreeBSD.org.

Press Contact

For interviews or further information, contact: marketing@FreeBSD.org,
+1-408-943-4100 ext 113; or The FreeBSD Foundation, +1-720-207-5142

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: January 26, 2021 by Sergio Carlavilla Delgado

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
