[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

FreeBSD as a Tier 1 cloud-init Platform

Links:
cloud-init Website URL: https://cloud-init.io/
cloud-init Documentation URL:
https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
cloud-init ongoing refactorization URL:
https://github.com/canonical/cloud-init/blob/main/WIP-ONGOING-REFACTORIZATION.rst

Contact: Mina Galić <freebsd@igalic.co>

cloud-init is the standard way of provisioning servers in the cloud.
Unfortunately, cloud-init support for operating systems other than Linux
is rather poor, and the lack of cloud-init support on FreeBSD is a
hindrance to cloud providers who want to offer FreeBSD as a Tier 1
platform. To remedy the situation, this project aims to bring FreeBSD
cloud-init support on par with Linux support. The broader plan is to
lift support across all BSDs.

This quarter has been going very, very slowly, for personal
reasons — also for lack of access to the right resources. I have been
trying to port the Infiniband functions. This has proven difficult,
because it falsified my thesis that ifconfig(8) is all that is needed to
figure out network interfaces on FreeBSD.

While waiting for resources, I debugged a boot panic and got it fixed:
499171a98c88. This now makes it possible to boot FreeBSD on
LXD — cloud-init’s CI platform. We still need to fix the high CPU usage
problem, but there is already an accepted review: D38898

A cloud-init colleague who works for Azure managed to give me access to
an HPC VM on Azure. Unfortunately, it was only for a limited time, and
that was not enough to figure out how to get Infiniband up and running
on FreeBSD — a task handled by Azure Agent on Linux, but FreeBSD’s
sysutils/azure-agent is rather lacking.

People interested in helping with this project could provide
ifconfig(8), ibstat(8), ibv_devinfo(1), etc… pastes from their
Infiniband systems. I would also be very happy about getting access to
hardware with Infiniband NICs, or hearing from people who have
successfully used FreeBSD on Azure HPC with Infiniband.

If there is interest in that platform, I will direct some energy to
fixing Azure Agent.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: April 18, 2023 by Graham Perrin

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
