[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

Ongoing work on LLDB multiprocess debugging support

Links:
Moritz Systems Project Description URL:
https://www.moritz.systems/blog/multiprocess-support-for-lldb/
Progress Report 1 URL:
https://www.moritz.systems/blog/implementing-non-stop-protocol-compatibility-in-lldb/
Progress Report 2 URL:
https://www.moritz.systems/blog/full-multiprocess-support-in-lldb-server/

Contact: Kamil Rytarowski <kamil@moritz.systems>
Contact: Michał Górny <mgorny@moritz.systems>

According to the upstream description, "LLDB is a next generation,
high-performance debugger. It is built as a set of reusable components
which highly leverage existing libraries in the larger LLVM Project,
such as the Clang expression parser and LLVM disassembler."

FreeBSD includes LLDB in the base system. The previous sponsored
projects improved LLDB, to make it a credible debugger for the base
system, although it still has a few limitations compared to the
contemporary versions of GNU GDB. This project started in April 2022. It
aims to implement full support for debugging multiple processes
simultaneously.

At the start of the project, LLDB featured very limited support for
multiprocess debugging. Currently, the server is already able to monitor
multiple processes using the multiprocess extension to the GDB Remote
Serial Protocol. The work on implementing the client-side counterpart
for this protocol is ongoing.

Once the project is finished, LLDB will be able to trace an arbitrary
number of forked processes simultaneously (equivalent to GDB’s
detach-on-fork off).

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: October 18, 2022 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
