[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD 7.1-RELEASE Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008 The
FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD:
release/7.1.0/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/article.sgml 186643
2008-12-31 08:07:10Z hrs $

FreeBSD is a registered trademark of the FreeBSD Foundation.

IBM, AIX, EtherJet, Netfinity, OS/2, PowerPC, PS/2, S/390, and ThinkPad
are trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in the
United States, other countries, or both.

IEEE, POSIX, and 802 are registered trademarks of Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. in the United States.

Intel, Celeron, EtherExpress, i386, i486, Itanium, Pentium, and Xeon are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Sparc, Sparc64, SPARCEngine, and UltraSPARC are trademarks of SPARC
International, Inc in the United States and other countries. Products
bearing SPARC trademarks are based upon architecture developed by Sun
Microsystems, Inc.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this document, and the FreeBSD Project was aware
of the trademark claim, the designations have been followed by the “™”
or the “®” symbol.

The release notes for FreeBSD 7.1-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system on the 7.1-STABLE development
line. This document lists applicable security advisories that were
issued since the last release, as well as significant changes to the
FreeBSD kernel and userland. Some brief remarks on upgrading are also
presented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 What's New

2.1 Security Advisories

2.2 Kernel Changes

2.2.1 Boot Loader Changes

2.2.2 Hardware Support

2.2.3 Network Protocols

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

2.2.5 File Systems

2.3 Userland Changes

2.3.1 /etc/rc.d Scripts

2.4 Contributed Software

2.5 Release Engineering and Integration

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 7.1-RELEASE. It
describes recently added, changed, or deleted features of FreeBSD. It
also provides some notes on upgrading from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 7.1-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/ or any of its mirrors. More
information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the “Obtaining FreeBSD” appendix to the FreeBSD
Handbook.

All users are encouraged to consult the release errata before installing
FreeBSD. The errata document is updated with “late-breaking” information
discovered late in the release cycle or after the release. Typically, it
contains information on known bugs, security advisories, and corrections
to documentation. An up-to-date copy of the errata for FreeBSD
7.1-RELEASE can be found on the FreeBSD Web site.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 What's New

This section describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 7.0-RELEASE.

Typical release note items document recent security advisories issued
after 7.0-RELEASE, new drivers or hardware support, new commands or
options, major bug fixes, or contributed software upgrades. They may
also list changes to major ports/packages or release engineering
practices. Clearly the release notes cannot list every single change
made to FreeBSD between releases; this document focuses primarily on
security advisories, user-visible changes, and major architectural
improvements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Security Advisories

Problems described in the following security advisories have been fixed.
For more information, consult the individual advisories available from
http://security.FreeBSD.org/.

+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| Advisory    | Date        | Topic                                    |
+=============+=============+==========================================+
| SA-08       | 17          | OpenSSH X11-forwarding privilege         |
| :05.openssh |  April 2008 | escalation                               |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA          | 1           | DNS cache poisoning                      |
| -08:06.bind | 3 July 2008 |                                          |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA-         | 3 Sep       | amd64 swapgs local privilege escalation  |
| 08:07.amd64 | tember 2008 |                                          |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA-0        | 3 Sep       | nmount(2) local arbitrary code execution |
| 8:08.nmount | tember 2008 |                                          |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA-         | 3 Sep       | Remote kernel panics on IPv6 connections |
| 08:09.icmp6 | tember 2008 |                                          |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| S           | 1 O         | IPv6 Neighbor Discovery Protocol routing |
| A-08:10.nd6 | ctober 2008 | vulnerability                            |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA-08:11    | 24 No       | arc4random(9) predictable sequence       |
| .arc4random | vember 2008 | vulnerability                            |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA          | 23 De       | Cross-site request forgery in ftpd(8)    |
| -08:12.ftpd | cember 2008 |                                          |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+
| SA-08       | 23 De       | netgraph / bluetooth privilege           |
| :13.protosw | cember 2008 | escalation                               |
+-------------+-------------+------------------------------------------+

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Kernel Changes

The clock_gettime(2) and the related system calls now support a clock ID
CLOCK_THREAD_CPUTIME_ID, defined in POSIX.

The cpuset(2) system call has been added. This is an API for thread to
CPU binding and CPU resource grouping and assignment.

The DTrace, a comprehensive dynamic tracing framework and dtrace(1)
userland utility have been imported from OpenSolaris. DTrace provides a
powerful infrastructure to permit administrators, developers, and
service personnel to concisely answer arbitrary questions about the
behavior of the operating system and user programs.

The ddb(4) kernel debugger now has an output capture facility. Input and
output from ddb(4) can now be captured to a memory buffer for later
inspection using sysctl(8) or a textdump. The new capture command
controls this feature.

The ddb(4) debugger now supports a simple scripting facility, which
supports a set of named scripts consisting of a set of ddb(4) commands.
These commands can be managed from within ddb(4) or with the use of the
new ddb(8) utility. More details can be found in the ddb(4) manual page.

The ddb(4) ex command now supports an /S mode which interprets and
prints the value at the requested address as a symbol. For example, ex
/S aio_swake prints the name of the function currently registered in via
aio_swake hook.

The ddb(4) show conifhk command has been added. This lists hooks
currently waiting for completion in run_interrupt_driven_config_hooks().

The fcntl(2) system call now supports F_DUP2FD command. This is
equivalent to dup(2), and compatible with Sun Solaris and IBM AIX.

The FreeBSD's linux(4) ABI support now implements sched_setaffinity()
and get_setaffinity() using real CPU affinity setting primitives.

The client side functionality of rpc.lockd(8) has been implemented in
FreeBSD kernel. This implementation provides the correct semantics for
flock(2) style locks which are used by the lockf(1) command line tool
and the pidfile(3) library. It also implements recovery from server
restarts and ensures that dirty cache blocks are written to the server
before obtaining locks (allowing multiple clients to use file locking to
safely share data). Also, a new kernel option options NFSLOCKD has been
added and enabled by default. If the kernel support is enabled,
rpc.lockd(8) automatically detects and uses the functionality.

The FreeBSD kernel now supports a new textdump format of kernel dumps. A
textdump provides higher-level information via mechanically
generated/extracted debugging output, rather than a simple memory dump.
This facility can be used to generate brief kernel bug reports that are
rich in debugging information, but are not dependent on kernel symbol
tables or precisely synchronized source code. More information can be
found in the textdump(4) manual page.

The wait4(2) system call now supports WNOWAIT flag to keep the process
whose status is returned in a waitable state and WSTOPPED which is
equivalent to WUNTRACED.

[amd64, i386, sparc64] The FreeBSD kernel now supports initial support
of binding interrupts to CPUs.

[amd64, i386] The sched_ule(4) scheduler is now the default process
scheduler in GENERIC kernels.

The sysctl variables kern.features.compat_freebsd[456] have been added.
These are corresponding to the kernel options COMPAT_FREEBSD[456].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1 Boot Loader Changes

[amd64, i386] The BTX kernel used by the boot loader has been changed to
invoke BIOS routines from real mode. This change makes it possible to
boot FreeBSD from USB devices.

[amd64, i386] A new gptboot boot loader has been added to support
booting from a GPT labeled disk. A new boot command has been added to
gpt(8), which makes a GPT disk bootable by writing the required bits of
the boot loader, creating a new boot partition if required.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2 Hardware Support

The cmx(4) driver, a driver for Omnikey CardMan 4040 PCMCIA smartcard
readers, has been added.

[sparc64] The kbdmux(4) driver has been added. The sunkbd(4) now
supports atkbd(4) emulation like ukbd(4).

The nvram(4) driver is now MPSAFE.

An option of the puc(4) driver PUC_FASTINTR has been no longer
supported.

The psm(4) driver now attempts detection of Synaptics touchpad before
IntelliMouse. Some touchpads will pretend to be IntelliMouse causing the
IntelliMouse probe to work and the Synaptics detection never to be done.

The uslcom(4) driver, a driver for Silicon Laboratories
CP2101/CP2102-based USB serial adapters, has been imported from OpenBSD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.1 Multimedia Support

The agp(4) driver now supports Intel G33 and G45.

[i386] The dpms(4) driver has been added to use the VESA BIOS for DPMS
during suspend and resume.

The DRM kernel driver now supports i915 GME devices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2.2 Network Interface Support

The ale(4) driver has been added to provide support for Atheros
AR8121/AR8113/AR8114 Gigabit/Fast Ethernet controllers. This driver is
not enabled in GENERIC kernels for this release.

The em(4) driver has been split into two drivers with some common parts.
The em(4) driver will continue to support adapters up to the 82575, as
well as new client/desktop adapters. A new igb(4) driver will support
new server adapters.

The hme(4) driver has been improved.

The ixgbe(4) driver has been updated to version 1.6.2 from Intel.

A bug in some of the miibus(4) supported drivers that IEEE 802.3
auto-negotiation was performed in a wrong order, has been fixed. Now it
chooses the correct technologies supported by IEEE 802.3 in the order
described in Annex 28B.3.

A workaround has been added for a bug in TCP/UDP hardware checksum
offload of the msk(4) driver for short frames. Note that for frames that
requires hardware VLAN tag insertion, the checksum offload workaround
does not work due to changes of checksum offset in mbuf after the VLAN
tag. So disabling hardware checksum offload for the VLAN interface is
needed in such cases.

The ndis(4) NDIS miniport driver wrapper has been improved.

The sf(4) driver has been improved and now supports checksum offloading.

The stge(4) driver now supports WOL (Wake on LAN).

The vr(4) driver has been improved.

[amd64, i386] The wpi(4) driver has been updated to include a number of
stability fixes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.3 Network Protocols

The arp(8) utility now supports reject and blackhole keywords. In the
entry marked as reject, traffic to the host will be discarded and the
sender will be notified the host is unreachable. In the entry marked as
blackhole, traffic is discarded but the sender is not notified.

The bpf(4) now supports an ioctl BIOCSETFNR. This is just like BIOCSETF
but it does not drop all the packets buffered on the descriptor and
reset the statistics.

The if_bridge(4) now allow to limit the number of source MACs that can
be behind a bridge interface via ifmaxaddr parameter of ifconfig(8).

A bug in the carp(4) interface configuration which leads to a system
panic has been fixed.

The dummynet(4) subsystem now supports fast mode operation which allows
certain packets to bypass the dummynet scheduler. This can achieve lower
latency and lower overhead when the packet flow is under the pipe
bandwidth, and eliminate recursion in the subsystem. The new sysctl
variable net.inet.ip.dummynet.io_fast has been added to enable this
feature.

The enc(4) now supports sysctl variables to control whether the
firewalls or bpf(4) will see inner and outer headers or just inner or
outer headers for incoming and outgoing IPsec packets.

The gre(4) now supports ioctls GRESKEY and GREGKEY which allows set or
get GRE key used for outgoing packets.

A bug in the ipsec(4) subsystem that PMTU was broken in those cases when
there was a route with a lower MTU than the MTU of the outgoing
interface, has been fixed.

The netatm subsystem has been removed due to lacking of multiprocessor
support.

The ng_nat(4) now supports redirect functionality in libalias. For more
details, see the manual page.

The ng_pptpgre(4) now supports multiple hooks like ng_l2tp(4), to use
one pair of pptpgre and ksocket nodes for all calls between two peers.

The resolver(3) now allows underscore in domain names. Although this is
a violation of RFC 1034 [STD 13], it is accepted by certain name servers
as well as other popular operating systems' resolver library.

A socket option TCP_CONGESTION for TCP socket has been added. This is
for setting and retrieving the congestion control algorithm. The name
used is to allow compatibility with Linux.

The rwlock(9) has been used throughout the inpcbinfo and inpcb
infrastructure, and protocols that depend on that infrastructure,
including UDP, TCP, and IP raw sockets to reduce the lock contentions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

The aac(4) driver now supports 64-bit array support for RAIDs larger
than 2TB and simultaneous opens of the device for issuing commands to
the controller.

The ata(4) driver now supports a loader variable
hw.ata.ata_dma_check_80pin. This can be used to disable the 80pin cable
check on broken systems such as certain laptops and Soekris boards. The
default value is 1.

A data corruption problem of the ata(4) driver on ServerWorks HT1000
chipsets has been fixed.

The ciss(4) driver now supports a loader tunable
hw.ciss.nop_message_heartbeat for NOP-message polling in
ciss_periodic(). This can be used as a workaround for
ADAPTER HEARTBEAT FAILED issue. The default value is 0 (disabled).

The geom_part GEOM class can be built as a kernel module.

The geom_linux_lvm GEOM class can be built as a kernel module.

The hptrr(4) driver has been updated to version 1.2 from Highpoint.

A buffer overflow in the iir(4) driver has been fixed. This likely fixes
a great number of weird problems that have been reported with this
driver.

The mpt(4) driver now supports mpt_user personality.

The rr232x(4) driver has been superseded by hptrr(4) driver.

The twa(4) driver has been improved with regard to stability on machines
with a plenty of memory and high CPU load.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.5 File Systems

The fdescfs(5) is now MPSAFE.

The gpart(8) now supports BSD disklabels (option GEOM_PART_BSD) and
VTOC8 disklabels (option GEOM_PART_VTOC8).

The gvinum(8) now accepts volume parameter when creating a plex.

A pathname lookup bug of a UNIX domain socket in the unionfs(7) has been
fixed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Userland Changes

The adduser(8) utility now supports a -M option to set the mode of a new
user's home directory.

The atacontrol(8) utility now supports a spindown command to set or
report timeout after which the device will be spun down.

The chflags(1) now supports a -v flag for verbose output, a -f flag to
ignore errors, and -h to allow setting flags on symbolic links with the
same semantics as (for example) chmod(1).

The cp(1) now supports a -a flag, which is equivalent to -RpP flags.

A bug in the cp(1) utility which prevents POSIX.1e ACL (see also acl(3))
from copying properly has been fixed.

The cron(8) utility now supports -m flag which overrides the default
mail recipient for cron mails unless explicitly provided by MAILTO= line
in crontab file.

The dhclient(8) now supports more options described in dhcp-options(5).

The dhclient(8) now supports is_default_interface() function which
determines if this interface is one with the default route.

A bug in the dhclient(8) that prevents removal of the default route from
working has been fixed.

The environ(7), environment array of strings now supports unsetting a
variable by setting the first character to NULL. This is required by
third-party software such as Dovecot and Postfix.

The fdisk(8) now supports a -q flag to not display any warnings.

The fetch(1) program and libfetch library now supports a NO_PROXY
environment variable. This specifies comma- or whitespace-separated list
of host names for which proxies should not be used. If a single asterisk
is specified, the use of proxies is disabled.

The ffsll(3) and flsll(3) functions have been added. These functions are
the same as ffs(3) and fls(3) except that they accept long long as the
arguments.

The fortune(6) program now supports FORTUNE_PATH environment variable to
specify search path of the fortune files.

A bug in the fortune(6) program that prevents -e option with multiple
files from working has been fixed.

The freebsd-update.conf(5) now supports IDSIgnorePaths statement.

The fwcontrol(8) utility now supports -f node option which specifies
node as the root node on the next bus reset.

[sparc64] The gcc(1) now accepts -mcpu option properly; it was hardcoded
as -mcpu=ultrasparc.

The gpt(8) now supports ZFS.

The ifconfig(8) now supports display of WPS IE (Wireless Provisioning
Services Information Element).

The kgdb(1) now supports an add-kld kld command to locate a kld(4) and
load its symbols.

The kgdb(1) now has a shared library backend for kernel files that
treats kld(4) as shared libraries and auto-loading symbols for kld(4) on
startup.

The kgdb(1) now supports a tid command and other kernel module related
commands even for a remote target.

The kvm_getcptime(3) function to obtain the global CPU time statistics
from the kernel has been added.

The libalias library now supports PORT and EPRT FTP commands in
lowercase.

The man(1) now includes a limited support of bzip2(1)-compressed manual
pages.

The mdconfig(8) now supports a -v (verbose) flag to -l command. It shows
size and backing store of all md(4) devices at one time.

The memrchr(3) function has been added. This behaves like memchr(3)
except that it locates the last occurrence of the specified character in
the string.

The incorrect output grammar of morse(6) program has been fixed.

The mountd(8) utility now supports -h bindip option which specifies IP
addresses to bind to for TCP and UDP requests. This option may be
specified multiple times. If no -h option is specified, INADDR_ANY will
be used. Note that when specifying IP addresses with this option, it
will automatically add 127.0.0.1 and if IPv6 is enabled, ::1 to the
list.

The moused(8) utility now supports -L flag which changes the speed of
scrolling and changes -U option behavior to only affect the scroll
threshold.

The mv(1) now support POSIX specification when moving a directory to an
existing directory across devices.

The periodic(8) now supports daily_status_mail_rejects_shorten
configuration variable in periodic.conf(5). This allows the rejected
mail reports to tally the rejects per blacklist without providing
details about individual sender hosts. The default configuration keeps
the reports in their original form.

The ping6(8) now uses exit status of 0 and 2 in the same manner as
ping(8).

The ping6(8) now supports an -o flag, which makes ping6(8) exit
successfully after receiving one reply packet.

The ping6(8) now supports -r and -R flags, which are equivalent to
ping(8)'s -a and -A flags, respectively.

The minimum allowed interval of ping6(8) has been decreased to 0.000001
from 0.01.

The realpath(1) utility now supports a -q flag to suppress warnings; it
now also accepts multiple paths on its command line.

The rfcomm_pppd(8) now supports a -D flag to register DUN (Dial-Up
Networking) service in addition to the LAN (LAN Access Using PPP)
service.

The sdpd(8) now supports a NAP, GN, and PANU profiles.

The setkey(8) utility now accepts esp as a protocol name for the spdadd
command.

A bug in telnetd(8) that it attempts authentication even when -a off
option is specified has been fixed.

The top(1) and vmstat(8) now support -P flag which displays per-CPU
statistics.

The traceroute(8) now supports an -a flag to display AS number
corresponding to the lookup IP address on each hop. It will query the
number to WHOIS server specified in -A option. If no -A is specified,
whois.radb.net will be used as the default value.

The uuid_enc_le(3), uuid_dec_le(3), uuid_enc_be(3), and uuid_dec_be(3)
functions have been added. These functions encode/decode a binary
representation of a UUID.

The watch(8) utility now supports more than 10 snp(4) devices at a time.

The ypserv(8) now supports a -P option to specify the port number on
which it should listen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1 /etc/rc.d Scripts

The rc.conf(5) now supports dummynet_enable variable which allow
dummynet(4) kernel module to be loaded when firewall_enable is YES.

The ntpd rc(8) script can work with no configuration file /etc/ntp.conf
now.

The ppp rc(8) script now supports multiple instances. For more details,
see description of ppp_profile variable in rc.conf(5).

The sysctl rc(8) script now supports loading /etc/sysctl.conf.local in
addition to /etc/sysctl.conf.

The rc.conf(5) now supports configuration of interfaces and attached
networks for firewall rule set by rc.firewall when firewall_type is
simple or client. See firewall_client_net, firewall_simple_iif,
firewall_simple_inet, firewall_simple_oif, and firewall_simple_onet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4 Contributed Software

am-utils has been updated from version 6.0.10p1 to version 6.1.5.

ISC BIND has been updated to version 9.4.2-P2.

awk has been updated from 1 May 2007 release to the 23 October 2007
release.

bzip2 has been updated from version 1.0.4 to version 1.0.5.

CVS has been updated to version 1.11.22.1.

hostapd has been updated to version 0.5.10 + radius ACL support.

libarchive has been updated to version 2.5.5.

ncurses library has been updated to version 5.6-20080503.

NTP has been updated to version 4.2.4p5.

OpenPAM has been updated from the Figwort release to the Hydrangea
release.

OpenSSH has been updated from version 4.5p1 to version 5.1p1.

The resolver(3) library has been updated to one of ISC BIND 9.4.3.

sendmail has been updated from version 8.14.2 to version 8.14.3.

The timezone database has been updated from the tzdata2007h release to
the tzdata2008h release.

wpa_supplicant has been updated to version 0.5.10 + syslog support.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5 Release Engineering and Integration

The supported version of the GNOME desktop environment (x11/gnome2) has
been updated from 2.20.1 to 2.22.

The supported version of the KDE desktop environment (x11/kde3) has been
updated from 3.5.8 to 3.5.10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

[amd64, i386] Beginning with FreeBSD 6.2-RELEASE, binary upgrades
between RELEASE versions (and snapshots of the various security
branches) are supported using the freebsd-update(8) utility. The binary
upgrade procedure will update unmodified userland utilities, as well as
unmodified GENERIC or SMP kernels distributed as a part of an official
FreeBSD release. The freebsd-update(8) utility requires that the host
being upgraded have Internet connectivity.

An older form of binary upgrade is supported through the Upgrade option
from the main sysinstall(8) menu on CDROM distribution media. This type
of binary upgrade may be useful on non-i386, non-amd64 machines or on
systems with no Internet connectivity.

Source-based upgrades (those based on recompiling the FreeBSD base
system from source code) from previous versions are supported, according
to the instructions in /usr/src/UPDATING.

  Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should, of course, only be attempted
  after backing up all data and configuration files.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
