[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   About
-   Features
-   Applications
-   Advocacy
-   Marketing
-   Administration
-   News
-   Events
-   Press
-   Artwork
-   Logo
-   Donations
-   Legal Notices
-   Privacy Policy

PortsDB: Program that imports the ports tree into an SQLite database

Links:
PortsDB URL: https://github.com/yurivict/freebsd-portsdb/

Contact: Yuri Victorovich <yuri@FreeBSD.org>

I developed the PortsDB project that imports FreeBSD ports into an
SQLite database. The port is ports-mgmt/portsdb.

The database can be fully rebuilt in around 20 minutes, after which it
can be quickly (in seconds) updated with new commits.

The database is currently updated hourly:
https://people.freebsd.org/~yuri/ports.sqlite.

PortsDB can be used to query ports using SQL, as a relational database.
External services like Repology, FreshPorts, Portscout, and other
similar services can use PortsDB to access information in the ports
tree.

Users can, for example, easily find their broken ports, or port
duplicates, or all ports that they maintain that use gmake, among many
other possible queries. Such queries aren’t easy to perform by grepping
the ports tree.

Cross-DB queries are also easy to do. They can combine PortsDB,
/var/db/pkg/repo-FreeBSD.sqlite, and /var/db/pkg/local.sqlite.

All that needs to be done to run PortsDB is ./import.sh, and then
./update.sh after more commits are pulled into the ports repository.

The periodic script is provided that can simplify integration with cron.
Multiple ready to use SQL queries are also included.

One particular immediate problem that PortsDB aims to solve is to fix
incorrect FreeBSD port versions displayed by Repology. Repology uses
ports INDEX which is missing some required information. This leads to
Repology not being able to distinguish between real versions, and
intermediate and made-up versions. PortsDB should allow Repology to
solve this problem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: January 23, 2023 by Lorenzo Salvadore

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
