[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/sparc64 5.0-RELEASE Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 by The FreeBSD Documentation Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/common/new.sgml,v
1.467.2.8 2003/01/14 18:12:51 roam Exp $

The release notes for FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE contain a summary of recent
changes made to the FreeBSD base system on the 5-CURRENT development
branch. Both changes for kernel and userland are listed, as well as
applicable security advisories that were issued since the last release.
Some brief remarks on upgrading are also presented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 What's New

2.1 Kernel Changes

2.1.1 Processor/Motherboard Support

2.1.2 Bootloader Changes

2.1.3 Network Interface Support

2.1.4 Network Protocols

2.1.5 Disks and Storage

2.1.6 Filesystems

2.1.7 PCCARD Support

2.1.8 Multimedia Support

2.1.9 Contributed Software

2.2 Security-Related Changes

2.3 Userland Changes

2.3.1 Contributed Software

2.3.2 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

2.4 Release Engineering and Integration

2.5 Documentation

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE on the
UltraSPARC hardware platform. It describes recently added, changed, or
deleted features of FreeBSD. It also provides some notes on upgrading
from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/development/sparc64/
or any of its mirrors. More information on obtaining this (or other)
release distributions of FreeBSD can be found in the ``Obtaining
FreeBSD'' appendix to the FreeBSD Handbook.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 What's New

This section describes many of the user-visible new or changed features
in FreeBSD since 4.0-RELEASE. It includes items that are unique to the
5-CURRENT branch, as well as some features that may have been recently
merged to other branches (after FreeBSD 4.6-RELEASE). The later items
are marked as [MERGED].

Typical release note items document new drivers or hardware support, new
commands or options, major bugfixes, or contributed software upgrades.
Applicable security advisories issued after 4.6-RELEASE are also listed.

Many additional changes were made to FreeBSD that are not listed here
for lack of space. For example, documentation was corrected and
improved, minor bugs were fixed, insecure coding practices were audited
and corrected, and source code was cleaned up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Kernel Changes

acct(2) has been changed to open the accounting file in append mode, so
that accton(8) can be used to enable accounting to an append-only file.
[MERGED]

A new in-kernel cryptographic framework (see crypto(4) and crypto(9))
has been imported from OpenBSD. It provides a consistent interface to
hardware and software implementations of cryptographic algorithms for
use by the kernel and access to cryptographic hardware for user-mode
applications. Hardware device drivers are provided to support hifn-based
cards ( hifn(4)) and Broadcom-based cards ( ubsec(4)). [MERGED]

A new ddb(4) command show pcpu lists some of the per-CPU data.

A devctl device has been added to allow userland programs to learn when
devices come and go in the device tree. This facility is primarily used
by the devd(8) utility.

devfs(5), which allows entries in the /dev directory to be built
automatically and supports more flexible attachment of devices, has been
largely reworked. devfs(5) is now enabled by default and can be disabled
by the NODEVFS kernel option. A ``rule'' subsystem permits the
administrator to define certain properties of new device nodes before
they become visible to the userland. Both static (e.g. /dev/speaker) and
dynamic (e.g. /dev/bpf*, some removable devices) nodes are supported.
Each devfs(5) mount may have a different ruleset assigned to it,
permitting different policies to be implemented for things like jails.
Rules and rulesets are manipulated with the devfs(8) utility.

A new digi driver has been added to support PCI Xr-based and ISA Xem
Digiboard cards. A new digictl(8) program is (mainly) used to
re-initialize cards that have external port modules attached such as the
PC/Xem. This driver replaces the older dgm driver.

An eaccess(2) system call has been added, similar to access(2) except
that the former uses effective credentials rather than real credentials.

Support has been added for EBus-based devices.

Each jail(2) environment can now run under its own securelevel.

The tunable sysctl variables for jail(2) have moved from jail.* to the
security.* hierarchy. Other security-related sysctl variables have moved
from kern.security.* to security.*.

The kernel environment is now dynamic, and can be changed via the new
kenv(2) system call.

The labpc(4) driver has been removed due to ``bitrot''.

The loader and kernel linker now look for files named linker.hints in
each directory with KLDs for a module name and version to KLD filename
mapping. The new kldxref(8) utility is used to generate these files.

lomac(4), a Low-Watermark Mandatory Access Control security facility,
has been added as a kernel module. It provides a drop-in security
mechanism in addition to the traditional UID-based security facilities,
requiring no additional configuration from the administrator. Work on
this feature was sponsored by DARPA and NAI Labs.

FreeBSD now supports an extensible Mandatory Access Control framework,
the TrustedBSD MAC Framework. It permits loadable kernel modules to link
to the kernel at compile-time, boot-time, or run-time to augment the
system security policy. The framework permits modules to express
interest in a variety of events, and also provides common security
policy services such as label storage. A variety of sample policy
modules are shipped in this release, including implementations of fixed
and floating label Biba integrity models, Multi-Level Security (MLS)
with compartments, and a number of augmented UNIX security models
including a file system firewall. This feature will permit easier
development and maintenance of local and vendor security extensions. The
extensibility service is enabled by adding options MAC to the kernel
configuration.

  Note: The MAC framework is considered an experimental feature in this
  release, and is not enabled by default

mutex(9) profiling code has been added, enabled by the MUTEX_PROFILING
kernel configuration option. It enables the debug.mutex.prof.* hierarchy
of sysctl variables.

The P1003_1B kernel option is no longer used and has been removed.

The random(4) device has been rewritten to use the Yarrow algorithm. It
harvests entropy from a variety of interrupt sources, including the
console devices, Ethernet and point-to-point network interfaces, and
mass-storage devices. Entropy from the random(4) device is now
periodically saved to files in /var/db/entropy, as well as at shutdown
time. The semantics of /dev/random have changed; it never blocks waiting
for entropy bits but generates a stream of pseudo-random data and now
behaves exactly as /dev/urandom.

A new kernel option, options REGRESSION, enables interfaces and
functionality intended for use during correctness and regression
testing.

RLIMIT_VMEM support has been added. This feature defines a new resource
limit that covers a process's entire virtual memory space, including
mmap(2) space. This limit can be configured in login.conf(5) via the new
vmemoryuse variable. [MERGED]

Support has been added for SBus-based devices.

The sab driver, which supports the Siemens SAB82532 serial chip found on
many newer Sparc Ultra machines, has been added.

A bug in the sendfile(2) system call, in which headers counted against
the size of the file to be sent, has been fixed. [MERGED]

The syscons(4) driver now supports keyboard-controlled pasting, by
default bound to Shift-Insert.

The uaudio driver, for USB audio devices, has been added. [MERGED]

The ucom(4) device driver has been added, to support USB modems, serial
devices, and other programs that need to look like a tty. The related
uftdi(4), uplcom(4), uvscom(4) drivers provide specific support for FTDI
serial adapters, the Prolific PL-2303 serial adapter and the SUNTAC
Slipper U VS-10U, respectively. [MERGED]

To increase security, the UCONSOLE kernel configuration option has been
removed.

The USER_LDT kernel option is now activated by default.

The uvisor(4) driver for connecting Handspring Visors via USB has been
added. [MERGED]

A VESA S3 linear framebuffer driver has been added.

The kernel crashdump infrastructure has been revised, to support new
platforms and in general clean up the logic in the code. One implication
of this change is that the on-disk format for kernel dumps has changed,
and is now byte-order-agnostic.

Extremely large swap areas (>67 GB) no longer panic the system.

Linker sets are now self-contained; gensetdefs(8) is unnecessary and has
been removed.

It is now possible to hardwire kernel environment variables (such as
tunables) at compile-time using config(8)'s ENV directive.

Idle zeroing of pages can be enabled with the vm.idlezero_enable sysctl
variable.

The FreeBSD kernel scheduler now supports Kernel-Scheduled Entities
(KSEs), which provides support for multiple threads of execution per
process similar to Scheduler Activations. At this point, the kernel has
most of the changes needed to support threading. The kernel scheduler
can schedule multiple threads per process, but only on a single CPU at a
time. More information can be found in kse(2).

  Note: KSE is a work in progress.

The kernel now has support for multiple low-level console devices. The
new conscontrol(8) utility helps to manage the different consoles.

The kernel memory allocator is now a slab memory allocator, similar to
that used in Solaris. This is a SMP-safe memory allocator that has
near-linear performance as the number of CPUs increases. It also allows
for reduced memory fragmentation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.1 Processor/Motherboard Support

SMP support has been largely reworked, incorporating code from BSD/OS
5.0. One of the main features of SMPng (``SMP Next Generation'') is to
allow more processes to run in kernel, without the need for spin locks
that can dramatically reduce the efficiency of multiple processors.
Interrupt handlers now have contexts associated with them that allow
them to be blocked, which reduces the need to lock out interrupts.

The UltraSPARC platform is now supported by FreeBSD. The following
machines are supported to at least some degree: Ultra 1/2/5/10/30/60,
Enterprise 220R/420R, Netra T1 AC200/DC200, Netra T 105, and Blade 100.
SMP is supported, and has been tested on the Ultra 2, Ultra 60,
Enterprise 220R, and Enterprise 420R.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.2 Bootloader Changes

The kernel and modules have been moved to the directory /boot/kernel, so
they can be easily manipulated together. The boot loader has been
updated to make this change as seamless as possible.

The boot loader now supports loading kernels from both UFS1 and UFS2
filesystems.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.3 Network Interface Support

The dc(4) driver now supports NICs based on the Xircom 3201 and Conexant
LANfinity RS7112 chips.

The gem driver has been added to support the Sun GEM Gigabit Ethernet
and ERI Fast Ethernet adapters.

The hme driver has been added to support the Sun HME Fast Ethernet
adapter, onboard on many Sun Ultra series machines.

The lmc driver has been added to support LAN Media Corp WAN adapters
based on the DEC ``Tulip'' PCI Fast Ethernet controller.

The stf(4) device is now clonable.

The tx(4) driver now supports true multicast filtering.

Network devices now automatically appear as special files in /dev/net.
Interface hardware ioctls (not protocol or routing) can be performed on
these devices. The SIOCGIFCONF ioctl may be performed on the special
/dev/network node.

``Zero copy'' support has been added to the networking stack. This
feature can eliminate a copy of network data between the kernel and
userland, which is one of the more significant bottlenecks in network
throughput. The send-side code should work with almost any network
adapter, while the receive-side code requires a network adapter with an
MTU of at least one memory page size (for example, jumbo frames on
Gigabit Ethernet). For more information, see zero_copy(9).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.4 Network Protocols

A FAST_IPSEC kernel option now allows the IPsec implementation to use
the kernel crypto(4) framework, along with its support for hardware
cryptographic acceleration.

  Note: The FAST_IPSEC and IPSEC options are mutually exclusive.

  Note: The FAST_IPSEC option is, at the moment, not compatible with
  IPv6 or the INET6 option.

A gre(4) driver, which can encapsulate IP packets using GRE (RFC 1701)
or minimal IP encapsulation for Mobile IP (RFC 2004), has been added.
[MERGED]

ICMP ECHO and TSTAMP replies are now rate limited. TCP RSTs generated
due to packets sent to open and unopen ports are now limited by separate
counters. Each rate limiting queue now has its own description.

ICMP Source Quench messages are no longer generated for forwarded
packets. The old behavior can be re-enabled with the
net.inet.ip.sendsourcequench sysctl variable.

IP multicast now works on VLAN devices. Several other bugs in the VLAN
code have also been fixed.

ipfw(4) has been re-implemented (the new version is commonly referred to
as ``IPFW2''). It now uses variable-sized representation of rules in the
kernel, similar to bpf(4) instructions. Most of the externally-visible
behavior (i.e. through ipfw(8)) should be unchanged, although ipfw(8)
now supports or connectives between match fields. [MERGED]

A new ng_device(4) netgraph node type has been added, which creates a
device entry in /dev, to be used as the entry point to a networking
graph.

The ng_gif(4) and ng_gif_demux(4) netgraph nodes, for operating on
gif(4) devices, have been added.

The ng_ip_input(4) netgraph node, for queueing IP packets into the main
IP input processing code, has been added.

A new ng_l2tp(4) netgraph node type, which implements the encapsulation
layer of the L2TP protocol as described in RFC 2661, has been added.
[MERGED]

A new ng_split node type has been added for splitting a bidirectional
packet flow into two unidirectional flows.

The ephemeral port range used for TCP and UDP has been changed to
49152-65535 (the old default was 1024-5000). This increases the number
of concurrent outgoing connections/streams.

The tcp(4) protocol's retransmission timer can now be manipulated with
two sysctl variables, net.inet.tcp.rexmit_min and
net.inet.tcp.rexmit_slop. The default has been reduced from one second
to 200ms (similar to the Linux default) in order to better handle
hiccups over interactive connections and improve recovery over lossy
fast connections such as wireless links.

The tcp(4) protocol now has the ability to dynamically limit the
send-side window to maximize bandwidth and minimize round trip times.
The feature can be enabled via the net.inet.tcp.inflight_enable sysctl.
[MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.5 Disks and Storage

The ata(4) driver (along with burncd(8)) now supports writing to media
in DVD+RW drives.

The ata(4) driver now supports accessing ATA devices as SCSI devices via
the CAM layer and drivers ( cd(4), da(4), st(4), and pass(4)). This
feature requires device atapicam in the kernel configuration. More
information can be found in atapicam(4). [MERGED]

The ata(4) driver now has support for the Sil 0680 and VIA 8233/8235
controllers. [MERGED]

The ata(4) driver now has support for the Acard ATP850, ATP860, and
ATP865 controllers.

The cd(4) driver now supports the same CDRIOCREADSPEED and
CDRIOCWRITESPEED ioctls that the acd(4) driver uses for setting the
speed of CDROM access.

The targ(4) driver has been rewritten and a new usermode has been added
to /usr/share/examples/scsi_target that emulates a direct access device.

The fdc(4) floppy disk driver has undergone a number of enhancements.
Density selection for common settings is now automatic; the driver is
also much more flexible in setting the densities of various subdevices.

The geom(4) disk I/O request transformation framework has been added;
this extensible framework is designed to support a wide variety of
operations on I/O requests on their way from the upper kernel to the
device drivers.

  Note: GEOM-enabled kernels no longer support ``compatability slices''.
  This feature (supported on the i386 and pc98 only) allowed a user to
  refer to a disk partition without specifying an MBR slice (e.g.
  /dev/ad0a); the kernel would automatically find the first applicable
  FreeBSD slice and use it. On GEOM-enabled kernels (the default), only
  the full partition names (e.g. /dev/ad0s1a) are allowed when referring
  to partitions within MBR slices. This change should affect very few
  users.

A GEOM Based Disk Encryption module has been added. It provides denial
of access to ``cold disks'', with four different cryptographic barriers
and up to four changeable pass-phrases. Much more information can be
found in the gbde(4) manual page. The gbde(8) userland utility provides
an operation and management interface to this module. This feature is
not enabled by default; it requires options GEOM_BDE to be added to a
kernel configuration file.

  Note: This feature should be considered experimental.

The isp(4) driver is now proactive about discovering Fibre Channel
topology changes.

The isp(4) driver now supports target mode for Qlogic SCSI cards,
including Ultra2 and Ultra3 and dual bus cards.

md(4), the memory disk device, has had the functionality of vn(4)
incorporated into it. md(4) devices can now be configured by
mdconfig(8). vn(4) has been removed. The Memory Filesystem (MFS) has
also been removed.

The mpt driver, for supporting the LSI Logic Fusion/MP architecture
Fiber Channel controllers, has been added. [MERGED]

The RAIDframe disk driver has been imported from NetBSD. This driver
provides software-based RAID 0, 1, 4, and 5 capabilities, as well as
other functionality. More information can be found in the raid(4) driver
manual page. The raidctl(8) utility is used to configure and unconfigure
disk arrays. This feature is not enabled by default, and requires
device raidframe to be configured into a kernel.

  Note: This feature should be considered experimental.

Some problems in sa(4) error handling have been fixed, including the
``tape drive spinning indefinitely upon mt(1) stat'' problem.

The SCSI_DELAY configuration parameter can now be set at boot time and
runtime via the kern.cam.scsi_delay tunable/sysctl.

The trm driver has been added to support SCSI adapters using the Tekram
TRM-S1040 SCSI chipset. [MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.6 Filesystems

Support for named extended attributes has been added to the FreeBSD
kernel. This allows the kernel, and appropriately privileged userland
processes, to tag files and directories with attribute data. Extended
attributes were added to support the TrustedBSD Project, in particular
ACLs, capability data, and mandatory access control labels (see
/usr/src/sys/ufs/ufs/README.extattr for details).

A filesystem snapshot capability has been added to FFS. Details can be
found in /usr/src/sys/ufs/ffs/README.snapshot.

When running with Soft Updates, statfs(2) and df(1) will track the
number of blocks and files that are committed to being freed.

kernfs(5) is obsolete and has been retired.

Client-side NFS locks have been implemented.

The client-side and server-side of the NFS code in the kernel used to be
intertwined in various complex ways. They have been split apart for ease
of maintenance and further development.

Support for filesystem Access Control Lists (ACLs) has been introduced,
allowing more fine-grained control of discretionary access control on
files and directories. This support was integrated from the TrustedBSD
Project. More details can be found in /usr/src/sys/ufs/ufs/README.acls.

For consistency, the fdesc, fifo, null, msdos, portal, umap, and union
filesystems have been renamed to fdescfs, fifofs, msdosfs, nullfs,
portalfs, umapfs, and unionfs. Where applicable, modules and mount_*
programs have been renamed. Compatibility ``glue'' has been added to
mount(8) so that msdos filesystem entries in fstab(5) will work without
changes.

pseudofs, a pseudo-filesystem framework, has been added. linprocfs(5)
and procfs(5) have been modified to use pseudofs.

Network filesystems (such as NFS and smbfs filesystems) listed in
/etc/fstab can now be properly mounted during startup initialization;
their mounts are deferred until after the network is initialized.

Read-only support for the Universal Disk Format (UDF) has been added.
This format is used on packet-written CD-RWs and most commercial
DVD-Video disks. The mount_udf(8) command can be used to mount these
disks.

Basic support has been added for the UFS2 filesystem. Among the new
features of UFS2:

-   The inode has been expanded to 256 bytes to make space for 64-bit
    block pointers.

-   A file-creation time field has been added.

-   A native extended attributes implementation has been added,
    permitting total attribute size stored on an inode to be up to twice
    the filesystem block size. This storage is used for Access Control
    Lists and MAC labels, but may also be used by other system
    extensions and user applications.

UFS1 remains the default on-disk format, although UFS2 can be selected
as an option in newfs(8) or via the partitioning screen in
sysinstall(8). 64-bit platforms can boot from UFS2 root filesystems.

To support new features mentioned in this section, minor changes have
been made to the format of the UFS1 superblock. These changes may create
some compatability problems when a system older than FreeBSD 4.7-RELEASE
attempts to mount(8) or fsck(8) a local UFS1 filesystem created by
FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE or later. FreeBSD 4.7-RELEASE and later are fully
compatible. This situation typically arises on a dual-boot machine with
multiple versions of FreeBSD installed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.7 PCCARD Support

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.8 Multimedia Support

A new API has been added for sound cards with hardware volume control.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.9 Contributed Software

The Forth Inspired Command Language (FICL) used in the boot loader has
been updated to 3.02.

Support for Advanced Configuration and Power Interface (ACPI), a
multi-vendor standard for configuration and power management, has been
added. This functionality has been provided by the Intel ACPI Component
Architecture project, as of the ACPI CA 20021118 snapshot. Some backward
compatability for applications using the older APM standard has been
provided.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.9.1 IPFilter

IPFilter has been updated to 3.4.29. [MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.9.3 KAME

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Security-Related Changes

A buffer overflow in the resolver, which could be exploited by a
malicious domain name server or an attacker forging DNS messages, has
been fixed. See security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:28 for more details.
[MERGED]

A buffer overflow in tcpdump(1), which could be triggered by
badly-formed NFS packets, has been fixed. See security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:29 for more details. [MERGED]

ktrace(1) can no longer trace the operation of formerly privileged
processes; this prevents the leakage of sensitive information that the
process could have obtained before abandoning its privileges. For a
discussion of this issue, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:30 for
more details. [MERGED]

A race condition in pppd(8), which could be used to change the
permissions of an arbitrary file, has been corrected. For more
information, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:32. [MERGED]

Multiple buffer overflows in OpenSSL have been corrected, by way of an
upgrade to the base system version of OpenSSL. More details can be found
in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:33. [MERGED]

A heap buffer overflow in the XDR decoder has been fixed. For more
details, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:34. [MERGED]

A bug that could allow local users to read and write arbitrary blocks on
an FFS filesystem has been corrected. More details can be found in
security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:35. [MERGED]

A bug in the NFS server code, which could allow a remote denial of
service attack, has been fixed. Security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:36 has
more details. [MERGED]

A bug that could allow local users to panic a system using the kqueue(2)
mechanism has been fixed. More information is contained in security
advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:37. [MERGED]

Several bounds-checking bugs in system calls, which could result in some
system calls returning a large portion of kernel memory, have been
fixed. More information can be found in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:38. [MERGED]

A bug that could allow applications using libkvm to leak sensitive file
descriptors has been corrected. (See security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:39
for more details.) [MERGED]

Buffer overflows in kadmind(8) and k5admin have been corrected. More
details can be found in security advisory FreeBSD-SA-02:40. [MERGED]

Errors in smrsh(8), which could allow users to circumvent restrictions
on what programs can be executed, have been fixed. See FreeBSD-SA-02:41
for details. [MERGED]

Buffer overflows in the DNS resolver(3), which could cause some
applications to fail, have been corrected. More details are in
FreeBSD-SA-02:42. [MERGED]

Multiple vulnerabilities in BIND have been fixed, as described in
FreeBSD-SA-02:43. [MERGED]

A file descriptor leak in the fpathconf(2) system call, which could
allow a local user to crash the system or cause a privilege escalation,
has been fixed. More details can be found in security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-02:44. [MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Userland Changes

Support for creating a.out(5) format executables with the base system
compiler toolchain has been removed.

adduser(8) and rmuser(8) are now sh(1) scripts, rather than Perl
scripts.

arp(8) now prints [fddi] or [atm] tags for addresses on interfaces of
those types.

The asa(1) utility, to interpret FORTRAN carriage-control characters,
has been added.

at(1) now supports the -r command-line option to remove jobs and the -t
option to specify times in POSIX time format.

The system awk(1) now refers to BWK awk.

basename(1) now accept -a and -s flags, which allow it to perform the
basename(3) function on multiple files.

biff(1) now accepts a b argument to enable ``bell notification'' of new
mail (which does not disturb the terminal contents as biff y would).
[MERGED]

biff(1) now uses the first terminal associated with the standard input,
standard output or standard error file descriptor, in that order. Thus,
it is possible to use the redirection facilities of a shell
(biff n < /dev/ttyp1) to toggle the notification for other terminals.

burncd(8) now supports Disk At Once (DAO) mode, selectable via the -d
flag. [MERGED]

burncd(8) now has the ability to write VCDs/SVCDs. [MERGED]

burncd(8) now accepts a value of max for its -s option to set the
drive's maximum write speed. [MERGED]

bzgrep(1), bzegrep(1), and bzfgrep(1) have been added to perform
grep(1)-type operations on bzip2(1)-compressed files.

calendar(1) now takes a -W option, which operates similar to -A but
without special treatment at weekends, and a -F option to change the
notion of ``Friday''.

catman(1) is now a C program, instead of a Perl script.

cdcontrol(1) now supports a speed command to set the maximum speed to be
used by the drive (the maximum possible speed can be selected setting
the speed to max). [MERGED]

A check_utility_compat(3) library function has been added to libc, to
determine whether certain FreeBSD base system utilities should behave in
FreeBSD 4-compatible mode or in a ``standard'' mode (default standard).
The configuration is done malloc(3)-style, with either an environment
variable or a symbolic link.

chflags(1) has moved from /usr/bin to /bin.

chmod(1) now supports a -h for changing the mode of a symbolic link.

chmod(1) now also, when the mode is modified, prints the old and new
modes if the -v option is specified more than once.

chown(8) no longer takes . as a user/group delimeter. This change was
made to support usernames containing a . character.

Use of the CSMG_* macros no longer require inclusion of <sys/param.h>

A compat4x distribution has been added for compatibility with FreeBSD
4-STABLE. It includes a subset of the libraries distributed with FreeBSD
4.7-RELEASE.

cp(1) now takes a (nonstandard) -n option to automatically answer ``no''
when it would ask to overwrite a file. [MERGED]

A new csplit(1) utility, which splits files based on context, has been
added.

ctags(1) now creates tags for typedefs, structs, unions, and enums by
default (implying the -t option). The new -T reverts to the old
behavior.

The daemon(8) program, a command-line interface to daemon(3), has been
added. It detaches itself from its controlling terminal and executes a
program specified on the command line. This allows the user to run an
arbitrary program as if it were written to be a daemon. [MERGED]

The devd(8) utility, a userland daemon that can run arbitrary commands
when devices come and go in the device tree, has been added. This
program is a generalization of some of the functionality of pccardd(8).

  Note: devd(8) is a work in progress.

devinfo(8), a simple tool to print the device tree and resource usage by
devices, has been added.

diskpart(8) has been declared obsolete, and has been removed.

dump(8) now supports a -L flag for dumping live UFS and UFS2 filesystems
safely. To obtain a consistent dump image, dump(8) takes a snapshot of
the filesystem and performs the dump on the snapshot. The snapshot is
removed when the dump is complete.

dump(8) now supports a new -S flag to allow it to just print out the
dump size estimates and exit. [MERGED]

expr(1) is now compliant with POSIX.2-1992 (and thus also with
POSIX.1-2001). Some program depend on the old, historic behavior and do
not properly protect their arguments to keep them from being
misinterpreted as command-line options. (the devel/libtool port/package,
used by many GNU programs, is a notable example). The old behavior can
be requested by enabling compatibility mode for expr(1) as described in
check_utility_compat(3).

fbtab(5) now accepts glob matching patterns for target devices, not just
individual devices and directories.

fdread(1), a program to read data from floppy disks, has been added. It
is a counterpart to fdwrite(1) and is designed to provide a means of
recovering at least some data from bad media, and to obviate the need
for a complex invocation of dd(1).

finger(1) now has support for a .pubkey file. [MERGED]

finger(1) now supports a -g flag to restrict the printing of GECOS
information to the user's full name only. [MERGED]

finger(1) now supports the -4 and -6 flags to specify an address family
for remote queries. [MERGED]

fold(1) now supports a -b flag to break at byte positions and a -s flag
to break at word boundaries. [MERGED]

fsck(8) wrappers have been imported; this feature provides
infrastructure for fsck(8) to work on different types of filesystems
(analogous to mount(8)).

The behavior of fsck(8) when dealing with various passes (a la
/etc/fstab) has been modified to accommodate multiple-disk filesystems.

fsck(8) now has support for foreground (-F) and background (-B) checks.
Traditionally, fsck(8) is invoked before the filesystems are mounted and
all checks are done to completion at that time. If background checking
is available, fsck(8) is invoked twice. It is first invoked at the
traditional time, before the filesystems are mounted, with the -F flag
to do checking on all the filesystems that cannot do background
checking. It is then invoked a second time, after the system has
completed going multiuser, with the -B flag to do checking on all the
filesystems that can do background checking. Unlike the foreground
checking, the background checking is started asynchronously so that
other system activity can proceed even on the filesystems that are being
checked. Boot-time enabling of this feature is controlled by the
background_fsck option in rc.conf(5).

fsck_ffs(8) now supports background filesystem checks to mounted FFS
filesystems with the -B option (Soft Updates must be enabled on these
filesystems). The -F flag now determines whether a specified filesystem
needs foreground checking.

ftpd(8) now supports the -m option to permit guest users to modify
existing files if allowed by filesystem permissions. In particular, this
enables guest users to resume uploads. [MERGED]

ftpd(8) now supports the -M option to prevent guest users from creating
directories. [MERGED]

ftpd(8) now supports -o and -O options to disable the RETR command; the
former for everybody, and the latter only for guest users. Coupled with
-A and appropriate file permissions, these can be used to create a
relatively safe anonymous FTP drop box for others to upload to. [MERGED]

ftpd(8) now supports the -W option to disable logging FTP sessions to
wtmp(5). [MERGED]

The fwcontrol(8) utility has been added to help users access and control
the FireWire subsystem. [MERGED]

The getconf(1) utility has been added. It prints the values of POSIX or
X/Open path or system configuration variables. [MERGED]

gifconfig(8) is obsolete and has been removed. Its functionality is now
handled by the tunnel and deletetunnel commands of ifconfig(8).

gprof(1) now has a -K option to enable dynamic symbol resolution from
the currently-running kernel. With this change, properly-compiled KLD
modules are now able to be profiled.

The ibcs(8), linux(8), osf1(8), and svr4(8) scripts, whose sole purpose
was to load emulation kernel modules, have been removed. The kernel
module system will automatically load them as needed to fulfill
dependencies.

ifconfig(8) now has the ability to set promiscuous mode on an interface,
via the new promisc flag. [MERGED]

ifconfig(8) now supports a monitor interface flag, which blocks
transmission of packets on that interface. This feature is useful for
monitoring network traffic without interacting with the network in
question.

By default, inetd(8) is no longer run by rc(8) at boot-time, although
sysinstall(8) gives the option of enabling it during binary
installations. inetd(8) can also be enabled by adding the following line
to /etc/rc.conf:

        inetd_enable="YES"

inetd(8) now has the capability for limiting the maximum number of
simultaneous invocations of each service from a single IP address.
[MERGED]

ipfw(8) filter rules can now match on the value of the IPv4 precedence
field.

kbdmap(1) and vidfont(1) have been converted from Perl to C.

kenv(1) now has the ability to set or delete kernel environment
variables.

The kget(8) utility has been removed (it was only useful for UserConfig,
which is not present in FreeBSD 5.0-RELEASE).

killall(1) no longer tries to kill zombie processes unless the -z flag
is specified.

ktrdump(8), a utility to dump the ktr trace buffer from userland, has
been added.

ldd(1) now supports a -a flag to list all the objects that are needed by
each loaded object.

libc is now thread-safe by default; libc_r contains only thread
functions.

libstand now has support for overwriting the contents of a file on a UFS
filesystem (it cannot expand or truncate files because the filesystem
may be dirty or inconsistent).

libgmp has been superceded by libmp.

The functions from libposix1e have been integrated into libc.

lock(1) now accepts a -v to disable switching VTYs while the current
terminal is locked. This permits locking the entire console from a
single terminal. [MERGED]

lpc(8) has been improved; lpc clean is now somewhat safer, and a new
lpc tclean command has been added to check to see what files would be
removed by lpc clean. lpc topq has been reimplemented, and now allows
for a much more flexible specification of which jobs should be moved
(such as a range of job numbers, or a hostname). An lpc bottomq command
has been added to move jobs to the bottom of a print queue, and a new
lpc setstatus command can be used to set a printer's status message.
[MERGED]

The ls(1) program now supports a -m flag to list files across a page, a
-p flag to force printing of a / after directories, and a -x flag to
sort filenames across a page. [MERGED]

makewhatis(1) is now a C program, instead of a Perl script.

man(1) is no longer installed SUID man, in order to reduce
vulnerabilities associated with generating ``catpages'' (preformatted
manual pages cached for repeated viewing). As a result, man(1) can no
longer create system catpages on a regular user's behalf. It is still
able to do so if the user has write permissions to the directory holding
catpages (e.g. a user's own manpages) or if the running user is root.

The mdmfs(8) command has been added; it is a wrapper around mdconfig(8),
disklabel(8), newfs(8), and mount(8) that mimics the command line option
set of the deprecated mount_mfs(8).

mesg(1) now conforms to SUSv3. Among other things, it now uses the first
terminal associated with the standard input, standard output or standard
error file descriptor, in that order. Thus, it is possible to use the
redirection facilities of a shell (mesg n < /dev/ttyp1) to control write
access for other terminals.

mountd(8) and nfsd(8) have moved from /sbin to /usr/sbin.

mv(1) now takes a (nonstandard) -n option to automatically answer ``no''
when it would ask to overwrite a file. [MERGED]

A number of archaic features of newfs(8) have been removed; these
implemented tuning features that are essentially useless on modern hard
disks. These features were controlled by the -O, -d, -k, -l, -n, -p, -r,
-t, and -x flags.

newfs(8) now supports a -O flag to select the creation of UFS1 or UFS2
filesystems.

The newgrp(1) utility to change to a new group has been added.

newsyslog(8) now compresses log files using bzip2(1) by default. (The
former behavior of using gzip(1) can be specified in
/etc/newsyslog.conf.)

The nextboot(8) utility has been added to specify an alternate kernel
and/or boot flags to be used the next time the machine is booted. A
previous incarnation of this feature first appeared in FreeBSD 2.2.

NFS now works over IPv6.

nice(1) now uses the -n option to specify the ``niceness'' of the
utility being run. [MERGED]

nsswitch support has been merged from NetBSD. By creating an
nsswitch.conf(5) file, FreeBSD can be configured so that various
databases such as passwd(5) and group(5) can be looked up using flat
files, NIS, or Hesiod. If /etc/nsswitch.conf does not exist, it will be
automatically generated from an existing /etc/hosts.conf at system
startup time. The /etc/hosts.conf file may be used by old executables;
it will be automatically generated from an existing /etc/nsswitch.conf
during system startup if it exists.

od(1) now supports the -A option to specify the input address base, the
-N option to specify the number of bytes to dump, the -j option to
specify the number of bytes to skip, the -s option to output signed
decimal shorts, and the -t option to specify output type. [MERGED]

The ofwdump(8) utility has been added to examine the OpenFirmware device
tree.

PAM support has been added for account management and sessions.

PAM configuration is now specified by files in /etc/pam.d/, rather than
a single /etc/pam.conf file. /etc/pam.d/README has more details.

A pam_echo(8) echo service module has been added.

A pam_exec(8) program execution service module has been added.

A pam_ftp(8) module has been added to allow authentication of anonymous
FTP users.

A pam_ftpusers(8) module has been added to perform checks against the
ftpusers(5) file.

A pam_ksu(8) module has been added to do Kerberos 5 authentication and
$HOME/.k5login authorization for su(1).

A pam_lastlog(8) module has been added to record sessions in the
utmp(5), wtmp(5), and lastlog(5) databases.

A pam_login_access(8) module has been added, to allow checking against
/etc/login.access.

The pam_nologin(8) module, which can disallow logins using nologin(5),
has been added.

The pam_opie(8) and pam_opieaccess(8) modules have been added to control
authentication via opie(4). [MERGED]

A pam_passwdqc(8) module has been added, to check the quality of
passwords submitted during password changes.

A pam_rhosts(8) module has been added to support rhosts(5)
authentication.

The pam_rootok(8) module, which can be used to authenticate only the
superuser, has been added.

A pam_securetty(8) module has been added to check the ``security'' of a
TTY, as listed in ttys(5).

A pam_self(8) module, which allows self-authentication of a user, has
been added.

A pam_wheel(8) module has been added to permit authentication to members
of a group, which defaults to wheel.

The pathchk(1) utility, which checks pathnames for validity or
portability between POSIX systems, has been added. [MERGED]

ping(8) now supports a -o flag to exit after receiving a reply.

prefix(8) is obsolete and has been removed. Its functionality is
provided by the eui64 command to ifconfig(8).

The pselect(3) library function (introduced by POSIX.1 as a slightly
stronger version of select(2)) has been added.

pwd(1) now supports the -L flag to print the logical current working
directory. [MERGED]

quota(1) now takes a -l flag to suppress quote checks on NFS
filesystems.

The pseudo-random number generator implemented by rand(3) has been
improved to provide less biased results.

rcmd(3) now supports the use of the RSH environment variable to specify
a program to use other than rsh(1) for remote execution. As a result,
programs such as dump(8) can use ssh(1) for remote transport.

rdist(1) has been retired from the base system, but is still available
from FreeBSD Ports Collection as net/44bsd-rdist.

The renice(8) command implements a -n option, which specifies an
increment to be applied to the priority of a process. [MERGED]

rpcbind(8) has replaced portmap(8).

rpcgen(1) now uses /usr/bin/cpp (as on NetBSD), not /usr/libexec/cpp.

rpc.lockd(8) has been imported from NetBSD. This daemon provides support
for servicing client NFS locks.

rtld(1) will now print the names of all objects that cause each object
to be loaded, if the LD_TRACE_LOADED_OBJECTS_ALL environment variable is
defined.

sed(1) now takes a -i option to enable in-place editing of files.
[MERGED]

The setfacl(1) and getfacl(1) commands have been added to manage
filesystem Access Control Lists.

sh(1) no longer implements printf as a built-in command because it was
considered less valuable compared to the other built-in commands (this
functionality is, of course, still available through the printf(1)
executable).

sh(1) now supports a -C option to prevent existing regular files from
being overwritten by output redirection, and a -u to give an error if an
unset variable is expanded. [MERGED]

The sh(1) built-in cd command now supports -L and -P flags to invoke
logical or physical modes of operation, respectively. Logical mode is
the default, but the default can be changed with the physical sh(1)
option. [MERGED]

The sh(1) built-in jobs command now supports a -s flag to output PIDs
only and a -l flag to add PIDs to the output. [MERGED]

sh(1) now supports a bind built-in command, which allows the key
bindings for the shell's line editor to be changed.

The sh(1) built-in export and readonly commands now support a -p flag to
print their output in ``portable'' format. [MERGED]

sh(1) no longer accepts invalid constructs as command & && command,
&& command, or || command. [MERGED]

spkrtest(8) is now a sh(1) script, rather than a Perl script.

split(1) now supports a -a option to specify the number of letters to
use for the suffix of split files. [MERGED]

In preparation for meeting SUSv2/POSIX <sys/select.h> requirements,
struct selinfo and related functions have been moved to <sys/selinfo.h>.

su(1) now uses PAM for authentication.

sysctl(8) now accepts a -d flag to print the descriptions of variables.

The default root partition in sysinstall(8) is now 100MB on the i386 and
pc98, 120MB on the Alpha.

sysinstall(8) now lives in /usr/sbin, which simplifies the installation
process. The sysinstall(8) manpage is also installed in a more
consistent fashion now.

sysinstall(8) no longer mounts the procfs(5) filesystem by default on
new installs. This change was made to improve security, but procfs(5)
can still be mounted manually or via an appropriate line in the fstab(5)
file.

tabs(1), a utility to set terminal tab stops, has been added.

The termcap(5) database now uses the xterm terminal type from XFree86.
As a result, xterm(1) now supports color by default and the common
workaround of setting TERM to xterm-color is no longer necessary. Use of
the xterm-color terminal type may result in (benign) warnings from
applications.

tftpd(8) now supports RFC 2349 (TFTP Timeout Interval and Transfer Size
Options); this feature is required by some firmware like EFI boot
managers (at least on HP i2000 Itanium servers) in order to boot an
image using TFTP.

A version of Transport Independent RPC (TI-RPC) has been imported.

tip(1) has been updated from OpenBSD, and has the ability to act as a
cu(1) substitute.

top(1) will now use the full width of its tty.

touch(1) now takes a -h option to operate on a symbolic link, rather
than what the link points to.

tr(1) now has basic support for equivalence classes for locales that
support them. [MERGED]

tr(1) now supports a -C flag to complement the set of characters
specified by the first string argument.

tunefs(8) now supports the -a and -l flags to enable and disable the
FS_ACLS and FS_MULTILABEL administrative flags on UFS file system.

A ugidfw(8) utility has been added to manage the rulesets provided by
the mac_bsdextended Mandatory Access Control policy, similar to ipfw(8).

UUCP has been removed from the base system. It can be found in the Ports
Collection, in net/freebsd-uucp.

unexpand(1) now supports a -t to specify tabstops analogous to
expand(1). [MERGED]

usbdevs(8) now supports a -d flag to show the device driver associated
with each device.

The base64 capabilities of uuencode(1) and uudecode(1) can now be
automatically enabled by invoking these utilities as b64encode(1) and
b64decode(1) respectively. [MERGED]

Functions to implement and manipulate OSF/DCE 1.1-compliant UUIDs have
been added to libc. More information can be found in uuid(3).

The uuidgen(1) utility has been added. It uses the new uuidgen(2) system
call to generate one or more Universally Unique Identifiers compatible
with OSF/DCE 1.1 version 1 UUIDs.

vidcontrol(1) now accepts a -S to allow the user to disable VTY
switching. [MERGED]

The default stripe size in vinum(8) has been changed from 256KB to
279KB, to spread out superblocks more evenly between stripes.

wc(1) now supports a -m flag to count characters, rather than bytes.

whereis(1), formerly a Perl script, has been rewritten in C. It now
supports a -x flag to suppress the run of locate(1), and a -q flag
suppresses the leading name of the query.

whereis(1) now supports a -a flag to report all matches instead of only
the first of each requested type.

which(1) is now a C program, rather than a Perl script.

who(1) now has a number of new options: -H shows column headings; -T
shows mesg(1) state; -m is an equivalent to am i; -u shows idle time; -q
to list names in columns. [MERGED]

wicontrol(8) now supports a -l to list the stations associated in hostap
mode and a -L to list available access points.

xargs(1) now supports a -I replstr option that allows the user to tell
xargs(1) to insert the data read from standard input at specific points
in the command line arguments rather than at the end. (A
FreeBSD-specific -J option is similar.) [MERGED]

xargs(1) now supports a -L option to force its utility argument to be
called after some number of lines. [MERGED]

Various routines in the C library now have support for ``wide''
characters. Among these are character class functions such as wctype(3),
wide character I/O functions such as getwc(3), formatted I/O functions
such as wprintf(3) and wscanf(3). Conversion functions to multibyte(3)
characters are also supported.

A number of utilities and libraries were enhanced to improve their
conformance with the Single UNIX Specification (SUSv3) and IEEE Std
1003.1-2001 (``POSIX.1''). Specific features added have been listed in
the release notes for each utility. The standards conformance of each
utility or library function is generally listed in its manual page.

A number of traditional BSD games have been removed from the base
system; they are now available in the games/freebsd-games port. These
include: adventure(6), arithmetic(6), atc(6), backgammon(6),
battlestar(6), bs(6), canfield(6), cribbage(6), fish(6), hack(6),
hangman(6), larn(6), mille(6), phantasia(6), piano(6), pig(6), quiz(6),
rain(6), robots(6), rogue(6), sail(6), snake(6), trek(6), wargames(6),
worm(6), worms(6), and wump(6). dm(8), which was used to control access
to games, is no longer necessary, and has also been removed. The
``utility-like'' games, as well as fortune(6), remain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1 Contributed Software

am-utils has been updated to 6.0.7.

A 29 November 2002 snapshot of awk from Bell Labs (variously known as
``BWK awk'' or ``The One True AWK'') has been imported. It is available
as awk or nawk.

BIND has been updated to 8.3.3. [MERGED]

Binutils has been updated to a pre-release snapshot of 2.13.2 from 27
October 2002.

file has been updated to 3.39.

gcc has been updated to gcc 3.2.1 (released version).

  Warning: The C++ ABI from gcc 3.2.1 is not compatible with previous
  versions.

gdb has been updated to version 5.2.1.

gperf has been updated to 2.7.2.

groff and its related utilities have been updated to FSF version 1.18.1.

Heimdal Kerberos has been updated to 0.5.1. [MERGED]

The ISC DHCP client has been updated to 3.0.1RC9.

The more(1) command has been replaced by less(1), although it can still
be run as more. [MERGED] Version 371 of less has been imported.

An XML processing library, named libbsdxml, has been added for the
benefit of XML-using utilities in the base system. It is based almost
entirely on an import of expat 1.95.5, but is installed under a
different name to avoid conflicts with any versions of expat installed
from the Ports Collection.

libpcap has been updated to 0.7.1. [MERGED]

libreadline has been updated to 4.2.

libz has been updated to 1.1.4.

lint has been updated to snapshot of NetBSD lint(1) as of 19 July 2002.

lukemftp 1.6 beta 2 (the FTP client from NetBSD) has replaced the
FreeBSD ftp(1) program. Among its new features are more automation
methods, better standards compliance, transfer rate throttling, and a
customizable command-line prompt. Some environment variables and
command-line arguments have changed.

m4(1) has been imported from OpenBSD, as of 26 April 2002. [MERGED]

ncurses has been updated to 5.2-20020615.

The NTP suite of programs has been updated to 4.1.1b.

OpenPAM (``Citronella'' release) has been imported, replacing Linux-PAM.

The OPIE one-time-password suite has been updated to 2.4. It has
completely replaced the functionality of S/Key. [MERGED]

Perl has been removed from the FreeBSD base system. It can be installed
from the FreeBSD Ports Collection, as a binary package, or via the Perl
distribution item in sysinstall(8)'s distribution menu. Moving Perl out
of the base system will make future upgrades and maintenence easier. To
reduce the dependence of the base system on Perl, many utilities have
been rewritten as shell scripts or C programs (specific notes are made
for each affected utility).

  Note: The Perl script removal work is ongoing.

  Note: Most of the distribution sets in sysinstall(8) include the new
  Perl distribution. This change will therefore be transparent to most
  users, with the exception that updating Perl will be done separately
  from the base system.

GNU ptx has been removed from the base system. It is not used anywhere
in the base system, and has not been recently updated or maintained.
Users requiring its functionality can install this utility as a part of
the textproc/textutils port.

The rc.d framework from NetBSD has been imported. It breaks down the
system startup functionality into a number of small, ``task-oriented''
scripts in /etc/rc.d, with dynamic-determined ordering of startup
scripts performed at boot-time.

GNU sort has been updated to the version from GNU textutils 2.0.21.

stat(1) from NetBSD, as of 5 June 2002 has, been imported.

GNU tar has been updated to 1.13.25. [MERGED]

tcpdump has been updated to 3.7.1. [MERGED]

The csh(1) shell has been replaced by tcsh(1), although it can still be
run as csh. tcsh has been updated to version 6.12. [MERGED]

The contributed version of tcp_wrappers now includes the tcpd(8) helper
daemon. While not strictly necessary in a standard FreeBSD installation
(because inetd(8) already incorporates this functionality), this may be
useful for inetd(8) replacements such as xinetd. [MERGED]

texinfo has been updated to 4.2. [MERGED]

top has been updated to version 3.5b12. [MERGED]

traceroute has been updated to LBL version 1.4a12.

The timezone database has been updated to the tzdata2002d release.
[MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1.1 CVS

cvs has been updated to a snapshot of 1.11.2.1, as of 1 December 2002.
[MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1.2 CVSup

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1.3 KAME

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1.4 OpenSSH

OpenSSH has been updated to version 3.4p1. [MERGED] Among the changes:

-   The *2 files are obsolete (for example, ~/.ssh/known_hosts can hold
    the contents of ~/.ssh/known_hosts2).

-   ssh-keygen(1) can import and export keys using the SECSH Public Key
    File Format, for key exchange with several commercial SSH
    implementations.

-   ssh-add(1) now adds all three default keys.

-   ssh-keygen(1) no longer defaults to a specific key type; one must be
    specified with the -t option.

-   A ``privilege separation'' feature, which uses unprivileged
    processes to contain and restrict the effects of future compromises
    or programming errors.

-   Several bugfixes, including closure of a security hole that could
    lead to an integer overflow and undesired privilege escalation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1.5 OpenSSL

OpenSSL has been updated to 0.9.6g. [MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1.6 sendmail

sendmail has been updated from version 8.9.3 to version 8.12.6.
Important changes include: sendmail(8) is no longer installed as a
set-user-ID root binary (now set-group-ID smmsp); new default file
locations (see /usr/src/contrib/sendmail/cf/README); newaliases(1) is
limited to root and trusted users; STARTTLS encryption; and the MSA port
(587) is turned on by default. See
/usr/src/contrib/sendmail/RELEASE_NOTES for more information. [MERGED]

By default, rc(8) no longer enables sendmail for inbound SMTP
connections. Note that sysinstall(8) may override this default for a
binary installation, based on what security profile is selected. This
functionality can also be manually enabled by adding the following line
to /etc/rc.conf:

        sendmail_enable="YES"

The permissions for sendmail alias and map databases built via
/etc/mail/Makefile now default to mode 0640 to protect against a file
locking local denial of service. It can be changed by setting the new
SENDMAIL_MAP_PERMS make.conf option. [MERGED]

The permissions for the sendmail statistics file, /var/log/sendmail.st,
have been changed from mode 0644 to mode 0640 to protect against a file
locking local denial of service. [MERGED]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.2 Ports/Packages Collection Infrastructure

BSDPAN, a collection of modules that provides tighter integration of
Perl into the FreeBSD Ports Collection, has been added.

For some time, FreeBSD 5.0-CURRENT (as well as some 4.X releases)
included a pkg_update(1) utility to update installed packages, as well
as their dependencies. This utility has been removed; a superset of its
functionality can be found in the sysutils/portupgrade port.

pkg_version(1), formerly a Perl script, has been rewritten in C. The -c,
frequently misused, has been removed. The sysutils/portupgrade port
provides a supported and safer alternative.

The Ports Collection infrastructure now uses XFree86 4.2.1 as the
default version of the X Window System for the purposes of satisfying
dependencies. To return to using XFree86 3.3.6, add the following line
to /etc/make.conf: [MERGED]

        XFREE86_VERSION=3

The libraries installed by the emulators/linux_base port (required for
Linux emulation) have been updated; they now correspond to those
included with Red Hat Linux 7.1. [MERGED]

By default, packages generated by the Ports Collection (as well as the
packages on the FTP sites) are now compressed using bzip2(1), rather
than gzip(1). (Thus, they now have a .tbz extension, rather than a .tgz
extension.) The package tools have been updated to handle the new
format.

The Ports Collection now maintains a separate index file
(/usr/ports/INDEX-5) for use with FreeBSD 5-CURRENT. A major motivation
for a separate index file is to cope with dependencies (such as
lang/perl5) that exist in FreeBSD 5-CURRENT but not FreeBSD 4-STABLE.
The index file for each package set is still called INDEX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4 Release Engineering and Integration

The bin distribution has been renamed base, in order to make creation of
combined install/recovery disks easier.

It is now possible to make releases of FreeBSD 5-CURRENT on a FreeBSD
4-STABLE host and vice versa. Cross-architecture (building a release for
a target architecture on a host of a different architecture) releases
are also possible. See release(7) for details. [MERGED]

A third drivers.flp floppy has been added to floppy releases. It holds
loadable modules containing drivers that do not fit in the kernel on the
kern.flp disk or in the mfsroot.flp image.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5 Documentation

A number of formerly-encumbered documents from the 4.4 BSD Programmer's
Supplementary Documents have been restored to /usr/share/doc/psd. These
include:

-   The UNIX Time-Sharing System (01.cacm)

-   UNIX Implementation (02.implement)

-   The UNIX I/O System (03.iosys)

-   UNIX Programming -- Second Edition (04.uprog)

-   The C Programming Language -- Reference Manual (06.Clang)

-   Yacc: Yet Another Compiler-Compiler (15.yacc)

-   Lex -- A Lexical Analyzer Generator (16.lex)

-   The M4 Macro Processor (17.m4)

Several formerly-encumbered documents from the 4.4 BSD User's
Supplementary Documents have been restored to /usr/share/doc/usd. They
include:

-   NROFF/TROFF User's Manual (21.troff)

-   A TROFF Tutorial (22.trofftut)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

Users with existing FreeBSD systems are highly encouraged to read the
``Early Adopter's Guide to FreeBSD 5.0''. This document generally has
the filename EARLY.TXT on the distribution media, or any other place
that the release notes can be found. It offers some notes on upgrading,
but more importantly, also discusses some of the relative merits of
upgrading to FreeBSD 5.X versus running FreeBSD 4.X.

  Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should, of course, only be attempted
  after backing up all data and configuration files.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/pub/FreeBSD/development/sparc64/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
