[FreeBSD The Power to Serve]

Donate to FreeBSD

 

-   Home

-   About
    -   Introduction
    -   Features
    -   Advocacy
    -   Marketing
    -   Privacy Policy
    -   Projects
    -   Ports

-   Get FreeBSD
    -   Release Information
    -   Release Engineering

-   Documentation
    -   FAQ
    -   Handbook
    -   Porter's Handbook
    -   Developer's Handbook
    -   Committer's Guide
    -   Manual Pages
    -   Presentations and Papers
    -   Documentation Project Primer
    -   All Books and Articles

-   Community
    -   Mailing Lists
    -   Forums
    -   User Groups
    -   Events
    -   FreeBSD Journal
    -   Q&A (external)

-   Developers
    -   Project Ideas
    -   Git Repository
    -   Subversion Repository
    -   GitHub Mirror
    -   Code Review (Phabricator)
    -   Wiki
    -   Continuous Integration Service

-   Support
    -   Vendors
    -   Security Information
    -   Bug Reports
    -   Submitting Bug Reports
<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
    -   Web Resources

-   Foundation
    -   Monetary Donations
    -   Hardware Donations

-   Get FreeBSD
-   Release Information
    -   Production Release:
        12.4
    -   Production Release:
        13.1
    -   Production Release:
        13.2
-   Snapshot Releases
    -   Upcoming Release:
        14.0
-   Ported Applications

FreeBSD/i386 4.11-RELEASE Release Notes

The FreeBSD Project

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005 The FreeBSD Documentation
Project

$FreeBSD: src/release/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/relnotes/common/new.sgml,v
1.22.2.419.2.9 2005/01/21 11:16:10 hrs Exp $

The release notes for FreeBSD 4.11-RELEASE contain a summary of the
changes made to the FreeBSD base system since 4.10-RELEASE. Both changes
for kernel and userland are listed, as well as applicable security
advisories for the base system that were issued since the last release.
Some brief remarks on upgrading are also presented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

1 Introduction

2 What's New

2.1 Security Advisories

2.2 Kernel Changes

2.2.1 Platform-Specific Hardware Support

2.2.2 Network Interface Support

2.2.3 Network Protocols

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

2.3 Userland Changes

2.4 Contributed Software

2.5 Release Engineering and Integration

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

1 Introduction

This document contains the release notes for FreeBSD 4.11-RELEASE on the
i386 hardware platform. It describes new features of FreeBSD that have
been added (or changed) since 4.10-RELEASE. It also provides some notes
on upgrading from previous versions of FreeBSD.

This distribution of FreeBSD 4.11-RELEASE is a release distribution. It
can be found at ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/ or any of its mirrors. More
information on obtaining this (or other) release distributions of
FreeBSD can be found in the ``Obtaining FreeBSD'' appendix in the
FreeBSD Handbook.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2 What's New

This section describes the most user-visible new or changed features in
FreeBSD since 4.10-RELEASE. Typical release note items document new
drivers or hardware support, new commands or options, major bugfixes, or
contributed software upgrades. Security advisories for the base system
that were issued after 4.10-RELEASE are also listed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1 Security Advisories

A programming error in the FreeBSD Linux binary compatibility which
allows a local attacker to read or write portions of the kernel memory
has been fixed. For more details, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-04:13.linux.

Various remotely-exploitable vulnerabilities of CVS's server mode
including double-free, integer overflow, and buffer overflow which can
result in information disclosure, denial-of-service, and/or possibly
arbitrary code execution, have been fixed via an upgrade to CVS 1.11.17.
For more details, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:14.

A bug in the fetch(1) utility which allows a malicious HTTP server to
cause arbitrary portions of the client's memory to be overwritten, has
been fixed. For more information, see security advisory
FreeBSD-SA-04:16.

A bug in procfs(5) and linprocfs(5) which could cause a malicious local
user could perform a local denial of service attack by causing a system
panic, or the user could read parts of kernel memory, has been fixed.
For more information, see security advisory FreeBSD-SA-04:17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2 Kernel Changes

The cp(4) driver has been added for Cronyx Tau-PCI synchronous serial
adapters.

A bug in mmap(2) that pages marked as PROT_NONE may become readable
under certain circumstances, has been fixed.

Bugs in vm_object_madvise(), vm_object_sync(), and contigmalloc()
functions in the FreeBSD virtual memory subsystem have been fixed. The
bugs in vm_object_madvise() and vm_object_sync() could cause memory
corruption in a variety of contexts, and one in contigmalloc() could
cause a system panic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1 Platform-Specific Hardware Support

The pbio(4) driver, which supports direct access to the Intel 8255A
programmable peripheral interface (PPI) chip running in mode 0 (simple
I/O) has been added.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2 Network Interface Support

The axe(4) driver, which supports ASIX Electronics AX88172 USB 2.0
Ethernet chipset has been added.

The bge(4) driver now supports BCM5750 and BCM5751.

The em(4) driver now supports 82541ER and 82546GB dual port PCI Express
adapter.

The ixgb(4) driver, which supports PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapters based
on the Intel 82597EX Ethernet controller chips, has been added.

The ng_hub(4) Netgraph node type, which supports a simple packet
distribution that acts like an Ethernet hub has been added.

A bug of jumbo frame handling in the sk(4) driver has been fixed.

The vr(4) driver now supports polling(4).

The per-interface polling(4) support has been implemented. All of the
network drivers that support polling(4) ( dc(4), fxp(4), em(4), nge(4),
re(4), rl(4), sis(4), ste(4), and vr(4)) now also support this
capability and it can be controlled via ifconfig(8).

A system panic which occurs when net.inet.ip.rtexpire and/or
net.inet6.ip6.rtexpire are set to 0 has been fixed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.3 Network Protocols

The random ephemeral port allocation, which come from OpenBSD has been
implemented. This is enabled by default and can be disabled using the
net.inet.ip.portrange.randomized sysctl. Note that the randomization can
lead to extremely fast port reuse at high connection rates, which is
causing problems for some users. To retain the security advantage of
random ports and ensure correct operation, it is disabled during periods
of high connection rates. More specifically, when the connection rate
exceeds the value of the net.inet.ip.portrange.randomcps sysctl (10 by
default), the randomization will be disabled for seconds specified in
the net.inet.ip.portrange.randomtime sysctl (45 by default).

ipfw(4) now supports lookup tables. This feature is useful for handling
large sparse address sets.

ipnat(8) now allows redirect rules to work for non-TCP/UDP packets.

The RST handling of the FreeBSD TCP stack has been improved to make
reset attacks as difficult as possible while maintaining compatibility
with the widest range of TCP stacks. The algorithm is as follows. For
connections in the ESTABLISHED state, only resets with sequence numbers
exactly matching last_ack_sent will cause a reset, all other segments
will be silently dropped. For connections in all other states, a reset
anywhere in the window will cause the connection to be reset. All other
segments will be silently dropped. Note that this breaks the RFC 793
specification and you can still disable this and use the conventional
behavior by setting a new sysctl net.inet.tcp.insecure_rst to 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.4 Disks and Storage

The ips(4) driver, which supports IBM/Adaptec ServeRAID controller has
been added.

The mpt(4) driver now supports LSI Logic FC929X Dual 2Gb/s Fibre Channel
card.

The trm(4) driver now supports the DC395U2W adapters and problems under
heavy load have been fixed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3 Userland Changes

The cron(8) daemon now accepts two new options, -j and -J, to enable
time jitter for jobs to run as unprivileged users and the superuser,
respectively. Time jitter means that cron(8) will sleep for a small
random period of time in the specified range before executing a job.
This feature is intended to smooth load peaks appearing when a lot of
jobs are scheduled for a particular moment.

The fwcontrol(8) now supports a -m option to set the default fwmem
target.

The -C 60 option is now used in the default $inetd_flags variable in
/etc/rc.conf.

The libc now supports eui64(3) functions.

The ngctl(8) now supports dot command to produce a GraphViz (.dot) of
the entire Netgraph.

The LQM, Link Quality Monitoring support in ppp(8) has been
reimplemented. The LQM, which is described in RFC 1989, allows PPP to
keep track of the quality of a running connection.

The userland ppp(8) implementation now supports a ``set rad_alive N''
command to enable periodic RADIUS accounting information being sent to
the RADIUS server.

A bug in rarpd(8) that prevents it from working properly when a
interface has more than one IP address has been fixed.

syslogd(8) now supports LOG_NTP facility.

Several off-by-one errors and potential buffer overruns in pax(1) have
been fixed.

whois(1) now supports NORID (Norwegian top level registry) handles, the
German whois nameserver, and a -k flag for querying whois.krnic.net (the
National Internet Development Agency of Korea) which hold details of IP
address allocations within Korea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4 Contributed Software

CVS has been updated from version 1.11.5 to version 1.11.17.

sendmail has been updated from version 8.12.11 to version 8.13.1.

GNU patch source files in src/contrib/patch has been removed. FreeBSD
have used the patch(1) sources in src/gnu/usr.bin/patch for nearly seven
years.

The timezone database has been updated from the tzdata2004e release to
the tzdata2004g release.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5 Release Engineering and Integration

The supported release of GNOME has been updated from 2.6 to 2.8.2. The
list of changes for each component can be found at
http://mail.gnome.org/archives/gnome-announce-list/2004-December/msg00026.html.

The supported release of KDE has been updated from 3.2.2 to 3.3.2.

The supported userland package for Linux binary compatibility has been
updated from linux_base-6 (based on Red Hat Linux 7.1) to linux_base-8
(based on Red Hat Linux 8.0).

The supported release of X Window System has been updated to XFree86
4.4.0. Note that Xorg X11R6.8.1 is also available in the FreeBSD Ports
Collection (x11/xorg).

The NOSECURE variable in make.conf has been removed because it is broken
and no longer supported. If you had been using the NOSECURE, please now
use the NOCRYPT instead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3 Upgrading from previous releases of FreeBSD

If you're upgrading from a previous release of FreeBSD, you generally
will have three options:

-   Using the binary upgrade option of sysinstall(8). This option is
    perhaps the quickest, although it presumes that your installation of
    FreeBSD uses no special compilation options.

-   Performing a complete reinstall of FreeBSD. Technically, this is not
    an upgrading method, and in any case is usually less convenient than
    a binary upgrade, in that it requires you to manually backup and
    restore the contents of /etc. However, it may be useful in cases
    where you want (or need) to change the partitioning of your disks.

-   From source code in /usr/src. This route is more flexible, but
    requires more disk space, time, and technical expertise. More
    information can be found in the ``Using make world'' section of the
    FreeBSD Handbook. Upgrading from very old versions of FreeBSD may be
    problematic; in cases like this, it is usually more effective to
    perform a binary upgrade or a complete reinstall.

Please read the INSTALL.TXT file for more information, preferably before
beginning an upgrade. If you are upgrading from source, please be sure
to read /usr/src/UPDATING as well.

Finally, if you want to use one of various means to track the -STABLE or
-CURRENT branches of FreeBSD, please be sure to consult the ``-CURRENT
vs. -STABLE'' section of the FreeBSD Handbook.

  Important: Upgrading FreeBSD should, of course, only be attempted
  after backing up all data and configuration files.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file, and other release-related documents, can be downloaded from
ftp://ftp.FreeBSD.org/.

For questions about FreeBSD, read the documentation before contacting
<questions@FreeBSD.org>.

For questions about this documentation, e-mail <doc@FreeBSD.org>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last modified on: May 15, 2021 by Allan Jude

Legal Notices | © 1995-2023 The FreeBSD Project All rights reserved. The
mark FreeBSD is a registered trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation and is
used by The FreeBSD Project with the permission of The FreeBSD
Foundation. Contact
>>>>>>> b1bb5fd9 (Processing txt files in data/doc)
